66. Having beheld him seated on his nurse’s side, like the son of Agni (Skanda) seated on Devî’s
side, he stood with the tears hanging on the ends of his eyelashes, and sighing he looked
up towards heaven.

67. But seeing Asita with his eyes thus filled with tears, the king was agitated through his
love for his son, and with his hands clasped and his body bowed he thus asked him in a broken
voice choked with weeping,

68. ‘One whose beauty has little to distinguish it from that of a divine sage, and whose brilliant
birth has been so wonderful, and for whom thou hast prophesied a transcendent future,--wherefore,
on seeing him, do tears come to thee, O reverend one?

69. ‘Is the prince, O holy man, destined to a long life? Surely he cannot be born for my sorrow.
I have with difficulty obtained a handful of water, surely it is not death which comes
to drink it.

70. ‘Tell me, is the hoard of my fame free from destruction? Is this chief prize of my family
secure ? Shall I ever depart happily to another life,--I who keep one eye ever awake, even
when my son is asleep?

71. ‘Surely this young shoot of my family is not born barren, destined only to wither! Speak
quickly, my lord, I cannot wait; thou well knowest the love of near kindred for a son.’

72. Knowing the king to be thus agitated through his fear of some impending evil, the sage thus
addressed him: ‘Let not thy mind, O monarch, be disturbed,--all that I have said is certainly
true.

73. ‘I have no feeling of fear as to his being subject to change, but I am distressed for mine
own disappointment. It is my time to depart, and this child is now born,--he who knows
that mystery hard to attain, the means of destroying birth.

74. Having forsaken his kingdom, indifferent to all worldly objects, and having attained the
highest truth by strenuous efforts, he will shine forth as a sun of knowledge to destroy
the darkness of illusion in the world.

75. ‘He will deliver by the boat of knowledge the distressed world, borne helplessly along,
from the ocean of misery which throws up sickness as its foam, tossing with the waves of old
age, and rushing with the dreadful onflow of death.

76. ‘The thirsty world of living beings will drink the flowing stream of his Law, bursting forth
with the water of wisdom, enclosed by the banks of strong moral rules, delightfully cool
with contemplation, and filled with religious vows as with ruddy geese.

77. ‘He will proclaim the way of deliverance to those afflicted with sorrow, entangled in objects
of sense, and lost in the forest-paths of worldly existence, as to travellers who have
lost their way.

78. ‘By the rain of the Law he will give gladness to the multitude who are consumed in this
world with that fire of desire whose fuel is worldly objects, as a great cloud does with its
showers at the end of the hot season.

79. ‘He will break open for the escape of living beings that door whose bolt is desire and whose
two leaves are ignorance and delusion,--with that excellent blow of the good Law which
is so hard to find.

80. ‘He, the king of the Law, when he has attained to supreme knowledge, will achieve the deliverance
from its bonds of the world now overcome by misery, destitute of every refuge, and
enveloped in its own chains of delusion.

81. ‘Therefore make no sorrow for him,--that belongs rather, kind sire, to the pitiable world
of human beings, who through illusion or the pleasures of desire or intoxication refuse
to hear his perfect Law.

82. ‘Therefore since I have fallen short of that excellence, though I have accomplished all
the stages of contemplation, my life is only a failure; since I have not heard his Law, I
count even dwelling in the highest heaven a misfortune.’

83. Having heard these words, the king with his queen and his friends abandoned sorrow and rejoiced;
thinking, ‘such is this son of mine,’ he considered that his excellence was his own.

84. But he let his heart be influenced by the thought, ‘he will travel by the noble path,’--he
was not in truth averse to religion, yet still he saw alarm at the prospect of losing his
child.

85. Then the sage Asita, having made known the real fate which awaited the prince to the king
who was thus disturbed about his son, departed by the way of the wind as he had come, his
figure watched reverentially in his flight.

