86. Having taken his resolution and having seen the son of his younger sister, the saint, filled
with compassion, enjoined him earnestly in all kinds of ways, as if he were his son,
to listen to the sage’s words and ponder over them.

87. The monarch also, being well-pleased at the birth of a son, having thrown off all those
bonds called worldly objects, caused his son to go through the usual birth-ceremonies in a
manner worthy of the family.

88. When ten days were fulfilled after his son’s birth, with his thoughts kept under restraint,
and filled with excessive joy, he offered for his son most elaborate sacrifices to the
gods with muttered prayers, oblations, and all kinds of auspicious ceremonies.

89. And he himself gave to the Brâhmans for his son’s welfare cows full of milk, with no traces
of infirmity, golden-horned and with strong healthy calves, to the full number of a hundred
thousand.

90. Then he, with his soul under strict restraint, having performed all kinds of ceremonies
which rejoiced his heart, on a fortunate day, in an auspicious moment, gladly determined to
enter his city.

91. Then the queen with her babe having worshipped the gods for good fortune, occupied a costly
palanquin made of elephants’ tusks, filled with all kinds of white flowers, and blazing
with gems.

92. Having made his wife with her child enter first into the city, accompanied by the aged attendants,
the king himself also advanced, saluted by the hosts of the citizens, as Indra
entering heaven, saluted by the immortals.

93. The Sâkya king, having entered his palace, like Bhava well-pleased at the birth of Kârttikeya,
with his face full of joy, gave orders for lavish expenditure, showing all kinds of
honour and liberality.

94. Thus at the good fortune of the birth of the king’s son, that city surnamed after Kapila,
with all the surrounding inhabitants, was full of gladness like the city of the lord of
wealth, crowded with heavenly nymphs, at the birth of his son Nalakûvara.

Book II [Life in the Palace]

