40. When he was born, the earth, though fastened down by (Himâlaya) the monarch of mountains,
shook like a ship tossed by the wind; and from a cloudless sky there fell a shower full
of lotuses and water-lilies, and perfumed with sandalwood.

41. Pleasant breezes blew soft to the touch, dropping down heavenly garments; the very sun,
though still the same, shone with augmented light, and fire gleamed, unstirred, with a gentle
lustre.

42. In the north-eastern part of the dwelling a well of pure water appeared of its own accord,
wherein the inhabitants of the gynaeceum, filled with wonder, performed their rites as
in a sacred bathing-place.

43. Through the troops of heavenly visitants, who came seeking religious merit, the pool itself
received strength to behold Buddha, and by means of its trees bearing flowers and perfumes
it eagerly offered him worship.

44. The flowering trees at once produced their blossoms, while their fragrance was borne aloft
in all directions by the wind, accompanied by the songs of bewildered female bees, while
the air was inhaled and absorbed by the many snakes (gathering near).

45. Sometimes there resounded on both sides songs mingled with musical instruments and tabours,
and lutes also, drums, tambourines, and the rest, from women adorned with dancing bracelets.

25. At that time the noxious creatures consorted together and did each other no hurt. Whatever
diseases there were among mankind were cured too without effort.1

26. The birds and deer did not call aloud and the rivers flowed with calm waters. The quarters
became clear and the sky shone cloudless; the drums of the gods resounded in the air.2

27. When the Guru was born for the salvation of all creatures, the world became exceeding peaceful,
as though, being in a state of disorder, it had obtained a ruler. Kāmadeva alone did
not rejoice.3

28. On seeing the miraculous birth of his son, the king, steadfast though he was, was much disturbed,
and from his affection a double stream of tears flowed, born of delight and apprehension.4

29. The queen was filled with fear and joy, like a stream of hot and cold water mixed, because
the power of her son was other than human on the one hand, and because she had a mother’s
natural weakness on the other.5

30. The pious old women failed in penetration, seeing only the reasons for alarm; so, purifying
themselves and performing luck-bringing rites, they prayed to the gods for good fortune.6

31. When the Brahmans, famed for conduct, learning and eloquence, had heard about these omens
and considered them, then with beaming faces full of wonder and exultation they said to
the king, who was both fearful and joyfull:–7

32. "On earth men desire for their peace no excellence at all other than a son. As this lamp
of yours is the lamp of your race, rejoice and make a feast to-day.8

33. Therefore in all steadfastness renounce anxiety and be merry; for your race will certainly
flourish. He who has been born here as your son is the leader for those who are overcome
by the suffering of the world.9

34. According to the signs found on this excellent one, the brilliance of gold and the radiance
of a lamp, he will certainly become either an enlightened seer of a Cakravartin monarch
on earth among men.10

35. Should he desire earthly sovereignty, then by his might and law he will stand on earth at
the head of all kings, as the light of the sun at the head of all constellations.11

36. Should he desire salvation and go to the forest, then by his knowledge and truth he will
overcome all creeds and stand on the earth, like Meru king of mountains among all the heights.12

37. As pure gold is the best of metals, Meru of mountains, the ocean of waters, the moon of
planets and the sun of fires, so your son is the best of men.13

38. His eyes gaze unwinkingly and are limpid and wide, blazing and yet mild, steady and with
very long black eyelashes. How can he not have eyes that see everything?"14

39. Then the king said to the twice-born: "What is the cause that these excellent characteristics
should be seen, as you say, in him, when they were not seen in previous great-souled
kings?" Then the Brahmans said to him:–15

40. "In respect of wisdom, renowned deeds and fame of kings there is no question of former and
latter. And, since in nature of things there is a cause here for the effect, listen to
your parallels thereto.16

