46. ‘That royal law which neither Bhrigu nor Aṅgiras ever made, those two great seers the founders
of families, their two sons Sukra and Vrihaspati left revealed at the end.

47. ‘Yea, the son of Sarasvatî I proclaimed that lost Veda which they had never seen in former
ages,--Vyâsa rehearsed that in many forms, which Vasishtha helpless could not compile;

48. ‘The voice of Vâlmîki uttered its poetry which the great seer Kyavana could not compose;
and that medicine which Atri never invented the wise son of Atri proclaimed after him;

49. ‘That Brahmanhood which Kusika never attained,--his son, O king, found out the means to
gain it; (so) Sagara made a bound for the ocean, which even the Ikshvâkus had not fixed before
him.

50. ‘Ganaka attained a power of instructing the twice-born in the rules of Yoga which none other
had ever reached; and the famed feats of the grandson of Sûra (Krishna) Sûra and his
peers were powerless to accomplish.

51. ‘Therefore it is not age nor years which are the criterion; different persons win pre-eminence
in the world at different places; those mighty exploits worthy of kings and sages,
when left undone by the ancestors, have been done by the sons.’

52. The king, being thus consoled and congratulated by those well-trusted Brâhmans, dismissed
from his mind all unwelcome suspicion and rose to a still higher degree of joy;

53. And well-pleased he gave to those most excellent of the twice-born rich treasures with all
due honour,--‘May he become the ruler of the earth according to your words, and may he
retire to the woods when he attains old age.’

54. Then having learned by signs and through the power of his penances this birth of him who
was to destroy all birth, the great seer Asita in his thirst for the excellent Law came to
the palace of the Sâkya king.

55. Him shining with the glory of sacred knowledge and ascetic observances, the king’s own priest,--himself
a special student among the students of sacred knowledge,--introduced into
the royal palace with all due reverence and respect.

56. He entered into the precincts of the king’s gynaeceum, which was all astir with the joy
arisen from the birth of the young prince,--grave from his consciousness of power, his pre-eminence
in asceticism, and the weight of old age.

57. Then the king, having duly honoured the sage, who was seated in his seat, with water for
the feet and an arghya offering, invited him (to speak) with all ceremonies of respect, as
did Antideva in olden time to Vasishtha:

58. ‘I am indeed fortunate, this my family is the object of high favour, that thou shouldst
have come to visit me; be pleased to command what I should do, O benign one; I am thy disciple,
be pleased to show thy confidence in me.’

59. The sage, being thus invited by the king, filled with intense feeling as was due, uttered
his deep and solemn words, having his large eyes opened wide with wonder:

60. ‘This is indeed worthy of thee, great-souled as thou art, fond of guests, liberal and a
lover of duty,--that thy mind should be thus kind towards me, in full accordance with thy
nature, family, wisdom, and age.

61. ‘This is the true way in which those seer kings of old, rejecting through duty all trivial
riches, have ever flung them away as was right,--being poor in outward substance but rich
in ascetic endurance.

62. ‘But hear now the motive for my coming and rejoice thereat; a heavenly voice has been heard
by me in the heavenly path, that thy son has been born for the sake of supreme knowledge.

63. ‘Having heard that voice and applied my mind thereto, and having known its truth by signs,
I am now come hither, with a longing to see the banner of the Sâkya race, as if it were
Indra’s banner being set up.’

64. Having heard this address of his, the king, with his steps bewildered with joy, took the
prince, who lay on his nurse’s side, and showed him to the holy ascetic.

65. Thus the great seer beheld the king’s son with wonder,--his foot marked with a wheel, his
fingers and toes webbed, with a circle of hair between his eyebrows, and signs of vigour
like an elephant.

