1. There was a king of the unconquerable Śākyas, Śuddhodana by name, of the race of Ikṣvāku
and the peer of Ikṣvāku in might. Pure he was in conduct and beloved of his people as the
moon in autumn.1

2. That counterpart of Indra had a queen, a very Śacī, whose splendour corresponded to his might.
In beauty like Padmā, in steadfastness like the earth, she was called Mahāmāyā, from
her resemblance to the incomparable Māyā.

3. This ruler of men, dallying with his queen enjoyed, as it were, the sovereign glory of Vaiśravaṇa.
Then without defilement she received the fruit of the womb, just as knowledge united
with mental concentration bears fruit.

4.Before she conceived, she saw in her sleep a white lord of elephants entering her body, yet
she felt thereby no pain.

5. Māyā, the queen of that god-like king, bore in her womb the glory of her race and, being
in her purity free from weariness, sorrow and illusion, she set her mind on the sin-free forest.

6. In her longing for the lonely forest as suited to trance. she asked the king to go and stay
in the grove called Lumbinī, which was gay like the garde of Caitraratha with trees of
every kind.

7. The lord of the earth, full of wonder and joy, recognised that her disposition was noble
from her possession of piety, and left the fortunate city, in order to gratify her, not for
a pleasure excursion.

8. In that glorious grove the queen perceived that the time of her delivery was at hand and,
amidst the welcome of thousands of waiting-women, proceeded to a couch overspread with an
awning.

25. At that time the constellation Pushya was auspicious, and from the side of the queen, who
was purified by her vow, her son was born for the welfare of the world, without pain and
without illness.2

26. Like the sun bursting from a cloud in the morning,--so he too, when he was born from his
mother’s womb, made the world bright like gold, bursting forth with his rays which dispelled
the darkness.

27. As soon as he was born the thousand-eyed (Indra) well-pleased took him gently, bright like
a golden pillar; and two pure streams of water fell down from heaven upon his head with
piles of Mandâra flowers.

28. Carried about by the chief suras, and delighting them with the rays that streamed from his
body, he surpassed in beauty the new moon as it rests on a mass of evening clouds.

29. As was Aurva’s birth from the thigh, and Prithu’s from the hand, and Mândhâtri’s, who was
like Indra himself, from the forehead, and Kakshîvat’s from the upper end of the arm,--thus
too was his birth (miraculous).

30. Having thus in due time issued from the womb, he shone as if he had come down from heaven,
he who had not been born in the natural way,--he who was born full of wisdom, not foolish,
as if his mind had been purified by countless aeons of contemplation.

31. With glory, fortitude, and beauty he shone like the young sun descended upon the earth;
when he was gazed at, though of such surpassing brightness, he attracted all eyes like the
moon.

32. With the radiant splendour of his limbs he extinguished like the sun the splendour of the
lamps; with his beautiful hue as of precious gold he illuminated all the quarters of space.

33. Unflurried, with the lotus-sign in high relief, far-striding, set down with a stamp,--seven
such firm footsteps did he then take,--he who was like the constellation of the seven
ṛshis.

34. ‘I am born for supreme knowledge, for the welfare of the world,--thus this is my last birth,’
thus did he of lion gait, gazing at the four quarters, utter a voice full of auspicious
meaning.

35. Two streams of water bursting from heaven, bright as the moon’s rays, having the power of
heat and cold, fell down upon that peerless one’s benign head to give refreshment to his
body.

36. His body lay on a bed with a royal canopy and a frame shining with gold, and supported by
feet of lapis lazuli, and in his honour the yaksha-lords stood round guarding him with golden
lotuses in their hands.

37. The gods in homage to the son of Mâyâ, with their heads bowed at his majesty, held up a
white umbrella in the sky and muttered the highest blessings on his supreme wisdom.

38. The great dragons in their great thirst for the Law,--they who had had the privilege of
waiting on the past Buddhas,--gazing with eyes of intent devotion, fanned him and strewed
Mandâra flowers over him.

39. Gladdened through the influence of the birth of the Tathâgata, the gods of pure natures
and inhabiting pure abodes were filled with joy, though all passion was extinguished, for
the sake of the world drowned in sorrow.

