41. Thus he took away the one, and protected the seven; he abandoned the seven and kept the
five; he obtained the set of three and learned the set of three; he understood the two and
abandoned the two.

42. Guilty persons, even though he had sentenced them to death, he did not cause to be killed
nor even looked on them with anger; he bound them with gentle words and with the reform
produced in their character,--even their release was accompanied by no inflicted injury.

43. He performed great religious vows prescribed by ancient seers; he threw aside hostile feelings
long cherished; he acquired glory redolent with the fragrance of virtue; he relinquished
all passions involving defilement.

44. He desired not to take his tribute of one-sixth without acting as the guardian of his people;
he had no wish to covet another’s property; he desired not to mention the wrong-doing
of his enemies; nor did he wish to fan wrath in his heart.

45. When the monarch himself was thus employed his servants and citizens followed his example,
like the senses of one absorbed in contemplation whose mind is abstracted in profound repose.

46. In course of time to the fair-bosomed Yasodharâ,--who was truly glorious in accordance with
her name,--there was born from the son of Suddhodana a son named Râhula, with a face like
the enemy of Râhu.

47. Then the king who from regard to the welfare of his race had longed for a son and been exceedingly
delighted [at his coming],--as he had rejoiced at the birth of his son, so did
he now rejoice at the birth of his grandson.

48. ‘O how can I feel that love which my son feels for my grandson?’ Thus thinking in his joy
he at the due time attended to every enjoined rite like one who fondly loves his son and
is about to rise to heaven.

49. Standing in the paths of the pre-eminent kings who flourished in primaeval ages, he practised
austerities without laying aside his white garments, and he offered in sacrifice only
those things which involved no injury to living creatures.

50. He of holy deeds shone forth gloriously, in the splendour of royalty and the splendour of
penances, conspicuous by his family and his own conduct and wisdom, and desirous to diffuse
brightness like the sun.

51. Having offered worship, he whose own glory was secure muttered repetitions of Vedic texts
to Svayambhû for the safety of his son, and performed various ceremonies hard to be accomplished,
like the god Ka in the first aeon wishing to create living beings.

52. He laid aside weapons and pondered the Sâstra, he practised perfect calm and underwent various
observances, like a hermit he refused all objects of sense, he viewed all his kingdoms
like a father.

53. He endured the kingdom for the sake of his son, his son for his family, his family for fame,
fame for heaven, heaven for the soul,--he only desired the soul’s continuance for the
sake of duty.

54. Thus did he practise the various observances as followed by the pious and established from
revelation, he asking himself, ‘now that he has seen the face of his son, how may my son
be stopped from going to the forest? ’

55. The prudent kings of the earth, who wish to guard their prosperity, watch over their sons
in the world; but this king, though loving religion, kept his son from religion and set
him free towards all objects of pleasure.

56. But all Bodhisattvas, those beings of pre-eminent nature, after knowing the flavour of worldly
enjoyments, have departed to the forest as soon as a son is born to them; therefore
he too, though he had accomplished all his previous destiny, even when the (final) motive
had begun to germinate, still went on pursuing worldly pleasure up to the time of attaining
the supreme wisdom.

Book III [The Prince’s Pertubation]

