1. From the time of the birth of that son of his, who, the true master of himself, was to end
all birth and old age, the king increased day by day in wealth, elephants, horses, and friends
as a river increases with its influx of waters.

2. Of different kinds of wealth and jewels, and of gold, wrought or unwrought, he found treasures
of manifold variety, surpassing even the capacity of his desires.

3. Elephants from Himavat, raging with rut, whom not even princes of elephants like Padma could
teach to go round in circles, came without any effort and waited on him.

4. His city was all astir with the crowds of horses, some adorned with various marks and decked
with new golden trappings, others unadorned and with long flowing manes,--suitable alike
in strength, gentleness, and costly ornaments.

5. And many fertile cows, with tall calves, gathered in his kingdom, well nourished and happy,
gentle and without fierceness, and producing excellent milk.

6. His enemies became indifferent; indifference grew into friendship; his friends became specially
united; were there two sides,--one passed into oblivion.

7. Heaven rained in his kingdom in due time and place, with the sound of gentle winds and clouds,
and adorned with wreaths of lightning, and without any drawback of showers of stones
or thunderbolts.

8. A fruitful crop sprang up according to season, even without the labour of ploughing; and
the old plants grew more vigorous in juice and substance.

9. Even at that crisis which threatens danger to the body like the collision of battle, pregnant
women brought forth in good health, in safety, and without sickness.

10. And whereas men do not willingly ask from others, even where a surety’s property is available,--at
that time even one possessed of slender means turned not his face away when solicited.

11. There was no ruin nor murder,--nay, there was not even one ungenerous to his kinsmen, no
breaker of obligations, none untruthful nor injurious,--as in the days of Yayâti the son
of Nahusha.

12. Those who sought religious merit performed sacred works and made gardens, temples, and hermitages,
wells, cisterns, lakes, and groves, having beheld heaven as it were visible before
their eyes.

13. The people, delivered from famine, fear, and sickness, dwelt happily as in heaven; and in
mutual contentment husband transgressed not against wife, nor wife against husband.

14. None pursued love for mere sensual pleasure; none hoarded wealth for the sake of desires;
none practised religious duties for the sake of gaining wealth; none injured living beings
for the sake of religious duty.

15. On every side theft and its kindred vices disappeared; his own dominion was in peace and
at rest from foreign interference; prosperity and plenty belonged to him, and the cities
in his realm were (healthy) like the forests.

16. When that son was born it was in that monarch’s kingdom as in the reign of Manu the son
of the Sun,--gladness went everywhere and evil perished; right blazed abroad and sin was still.

17. Since at the birth of this son of the king such a universal accomplishment of all objects
took place, the king in consequence caused the prince’s name to be Sarvârthasiddha.

18. But the queen Mâyâ, having seen the great glory of her new-born son, like some ṛshi of the
gods, could not sustain the joy which it brought; and that she might not die she went to
heaven.

19. Then the queen’s sister, with an influence like a mother’s, undistinguished from the real
mother in her affection or tenderness, brought up as her own son the young prince who was
like the offspring of the gods.

20. Then like the young sun on the eastern mountain or the fire when fanned by the wind, the
prince gradually grew in all due perfection, like the moon in the fortnight of brightness.

