21. Then they brought him as presents from the houses of his friends costly unguents of sandalwood,
and strings of gems exactly like wreaths of plants, and little golden carriages yoked
with deer;

22. Ornaments also suitable to his age, and elephants, deer, and horses made of gold, carriages
and oxen decked with rich garments, and carts gay with silver and gold.

23. Thus indulged with all sorts of such objects to please the senses as were suitable to his
years, child as he was, he behaved not like a child in gravity, purity, wisdom, and dignity.

24. When he had passed the period of childhood and reached that of middle youth, the young prince
learned in a few days the various sciences suitable to his race, which generally took
many years to master.

25. But having heard before from the great seer Asita his destined future which was to embrace
transcendental happiness, the anxious care of the king of the present Sâkya race turned
the prince to sensual pleasures.

26. Then he sought for him from a family of unblemished moral excellence a bride possessed of
beauty, modesty, and gentle bearing, of wide-spread glory, Yasodharâ by name, having a name
well worthy of her, a very goddess of good fortune.

27. Then after that the prince, beloved of the king his father, he who was like Sanatkumâra,
rejoiced in the society of that Sâkya princess as the thousand-eyed (Indra) rejoiced with
his bride Sacî.

28. ‘He might perchance see some inauspicious sight which could disturb his mind,’--thus reflecting
the king had a dwelling prepared for him apart from the busy press in the recesses
of the palace.

29. Then he spent his time in those royal apartments, furnished with the delights proper for
every season, gaily decorated like heavenly chariots upon the earth, and bright like the
clouds of autumn, amidst the splendid musical concerts of singing-women.

30. With the softly-sounding tambourines beaten by the tips of the women’s hands, and ornamented
with golden rims, and with the dances which were like the dances of the heavenly nymphs,
that palace shone like Mount Kailâsa.

31. There the women delighted him with their soft voices, their beautiful pearl-garlands, their
playful intoxication, their sweet laughter, and their stolen glances concealed by their
brows.

32. Borne in the arms of these women well-skilled in the ways of love, and reckless in the pursuit
of pleasure, he fell from the roof of a pavilion and yet reached not the ground, like
a holy sage stepping from a heavenly chariot.

33. Meanwhile the king for the sake of ensuring his son’s prosperity and stirred in heart by
the destiny which had been predicted for him, delighted himself in perfect calm, ceased from
all evil, practised all self-restraint, and rewarded the good.

34. He turned to no sensual pleasures like one wanting in self-control; he felt no violent delight
in any state of birth; he subdued by firmness the restless horses of the senses; and
he surpassed his kindred and citizens by his virtues.

35. He sought not learning to vex another; such knowledge as was beneficent, that only he studied;
he wished well to all mankind as much as to his own subjects.

36. He worshipped also duly the brilliant (Agni) that tutelary god of the Aṅgirasas, for his
son’s long life; and he offered oblations in a large fire, and gave gold and cows to the
Brâhmans.

37. He bathed to purify his body and mind with the waters of holy places and of holy feelings;
and at the same time he drank the soma-juice as enjoined by the Veda, and the heartfelt
self-produced happiness of perfect calm.

38. He only spoke what was pleasant and not unprofitable; he discoursed about what was true
and not ill-natured, he could not speak even to himself for very shame a false pleasant thing
or a harsh truth.

39. In things which required to be done, whether they were pleasant or disagreeable, he found
no reason either for desire or dislike; he pursued the advantageous which could be attained
without litigation; he did not so highly value sacrifice.

40. When a suppliant came to him with a petition, he at once hastened to quench his thirst with
the water sprinkled on his gift; and without fighting, by the battle-axe of his demeanour
he smote down the arrogant armed with double pride.

