1. On a certain day he heard of the forests carpeted with tender grass, with their trees resounding
with the kokilas, adorned with lotus-ponds, and which had been all bound up in the
cold season.

2. Having heard of the delightful appearance of the city groves beloved by the women, he resolved
to go out of doors, like an elephant long shut up in a house.

3. The king, having learned the character of the wish thus expressed by his son, ordered a pleasure-party
to be prepared, worthy of his own affection and his son’s beauty and youth.

4. He prohibited the encounter of any afflicted common person in the highroad; ‘heaven forbid
that the prince with his tender nature should even imagine himself to be distressed.’

5. Then having removed out of the way with the greatest gentleness all those who had mutilated
limbs or maimed senses, the decrepit and the sick and all squalid beggars, they made the
highway assume its perfect beauty.

6. Along this road thus made beautiful, the fortunate prince with his well-trained attendants
came down one day at a proper time from the roof of the palace and went to visit the king
by his leave.

7. Then the king, with tears rising to his eyes, having smelt his son’s head and long gazed
upon him, gave him his permission, saying, ‘Go;’ but in his heart through affection he could
not let him depart.

8. He then mounted a golden chariot, adorned with reins bright like flashing lightning, and
yoked with four gentle horses, all wearing golden trappings.

9. With a worthy retinue he entered the road which was strewn with heaps of gleaming flowers,
with garlands suspended and banners waving, like the moon with its asterism entering the
sky.

10. Slowly, slowly he passed along the highway, watched on every side by the citizens, and beshowered
by their eyes opened wide with curiosity like blue lotuses.

11. Some praised him for his gentle disposition, others hailed him for his glorious appearance,
others eulogised his beauty from his fine countenance and desired for him length of days.

12. Hump-backed men coming out from the great families, and troops of foresters and dwarfs,
and women coming out from the meaner houses bowed down like the banners of some procession
of the gods.

13. Hearing the news, ‘the prince is going out,’ from the attendants of the female apartments,
the women hastened to the roofs of the different mansions, having obtained the leave of
their lords.

14. Hindered by the strings of their girdles which had slipped down, with their eyes bewildered
as just awakened from sleep, and with their ornaments hastily put on in the stir of the
news, and filled with curiosity, they crowded round;

15. Frightening the flocks of birds which lived in the houses, with the noise of their girdles
and the jingling of their anklets which resounded on the staircases and roofs of the mansions,
and mutually reproaching one another for their hurry.

16. Some of these women, even in their haste as they rushed longing to see, were delayed in
their going by the weight of their hips and full bosoms.

17. Another, though well able to go herself, checked her pace and forbore to run, hiding with
shame her ornaments hitherto worn only in seclusion, and now too boldly displayed.

18. There they were restlessly swaying about in the windows, crowded together in the mutual
press, with their earrings polished by the continual collision and their ornaments all jingling.

19. The lotus-like faces of the women gleamed while they looked out from the windows with their
earrings coming into mutual proximity, as if they were real lotuses fastened upon the
houses.

20. With the palaces all alive with crowds of damsels, every aperture thrown open in eager curiosity,
the magnificent city appeared on every side like heaven with its divine chariots
thronged with celestial nymphs.

