21. The faces of the beautiful women shone like lotuses wreathed in garlands, while through
the narrowness of the windows their earrings were transferred to each other’s cheeks.

22. Gazing down upon the prince in the road. the women appeared as if longing to fall to the
earth; gazing up to him with upturned faces, the men seemed as if longing to rise to heaven.

23. Beholding the king’s son thus radiant in his beauty and glory, those women softly whispered,
‘happy is his wife,’ with pure minds and from no baser feeling.

24. ‘He with the long sturdy arms, who stands in his beauty like the flower-armed god visibly
present, will leave his royal pomp and devote himself to religion,’ thus thinking, full
of kindly feelings towards him, they all offered reverence.

25. Beholding for the first time that high-road thus crowded with respectful citizens, all dressed
in white sedate garments, the prince for a while did feel a little pleasure and thought
that it seemed to promise a revival of his youth.

26. But then the gods, dwelling in pure abodes, having beheld that city thus rejoicing like
heaven itself, created an old man to walk along on purpose to stir the heart of the king’s
son.

27. The prince having beheld him thus overcome with decrepitude and different in form from other
men, with his gaze intently fixed on him, thus addressed his driver with simple confidence:

28. ‘Who is this man that has come here, O charioteer, with white hair and his hand resting
on a staff, his eyes hidden beneath his brows, his limbs bent down and hanging loose,--is
this a change produced in him or his natural state or an accident?’

29. Thus addressed, the charioteer revealed to the king’s son the secret that should have been
kept so carefully, thinking no harm in his simplicity, for those same gods had bewildered
his mind:

30. ‘That is old age by which he is broken down,--the ravisher of beauty, the ruin of vigour,
the cause of sorrow, the destruction of delights, the bane of memories, the enemy of the
senses.

31. ‘He too once drank milk in his childhood, and in course of time he learned to grope on the
ground; having step by step become a vigorous youth, he has step by step in the same way
reached old age.’

32. Being thus addressed, the prince, starting a little, spoke these words to the charioteer,
‘What! will this evil come to me also?’ and to him again spoke the charioteer:

33. ‘It will come without doubt by the force of time through multitude of years even to my long-lived
lord; all the world knows thus that old age will destroy their comeliness and they
are content to have it so.’

34. Then he, the great-souled one, who had his mind purified by the impressions of former good
actions, who possessed a store of merits accumulated through many preceding aeons, was
deeply agitated when he heard of old age, like a bull who has heard the crash of a thunderbolt
close by.

35. Drawing a long sigh and shaking his head, and fixing his eyes on that decrepit old man,
and looking round on that exultant multitude he then uttered these distressed words:

36. ‘Old age thus strikes down all alike, our memory, comeliness, and valour; and yet the world
is not disturbed, even when it sees such a fate visibly impending.

37. ‘Since such is our condition, O charioteer, turn back the horses,--go quickly home; how
can I rejoice in the pleasure-garden, when the thoughts arising from old age overpower me?’

38. Then the charioteer at the command of the king’s son turned the chariot back, and the prince
lost in thought entered even that royal palace as if it were empty.

39. But when he found no happiness even there, as he continually kept reflecting, ‘old age,
old age,’ then once more, with the permission of the king, he went out with the same arrangement
as before.

40. Then the same deities created another man with his body all afflicted by disease; and on
seeing him the son of Suddhodana addressed the charioteer, having his gaze fixed on the man:

