41. ‘Yonder man with a swollen belly, his whole frame shaking as he pants, his arms and shoulders
hanging loose, his body all pale and thin, uttering plaintively the word "mother," when
he embraces a stranger,--who, pray, is this?’

42. Then his charioteer answered, ‘Gentle Sir, it is a very great affliction called sickness,
that has grown up, caused by the inflammation of the (three) humours, which has made even
this strong man no longer master of himself.’

43. Then the prince again addressed him, looking upon the man compassionately, ‘Is this evil
peculiar to him or are all beings alike threatened by sickness?’

44. Then the charioteer answered, ‘O prince, this evil is common to all; thus pressed round
by diseases men run to pleasure, though racked with pain.’

45. Having heard this account, his mind deeply distressed, he trembled like the moon reflected
in the waves of water; and full of sorrow he uttered these words in a low voice:

46. ‘Even while they see all this calamity of diseases mankind can yet feel tranquillity; alas
for the scattered intelligence of men who can smile when still not free from the terrors
of disease!

47. ‘Let the chariot, O charioteer, be turned back from going outside, let it return straight
to the king’s palace; having heard this alarm of disease, my mind shrinks into itself, repelled
from pleasures.’

48. Then having turned back, with all joy departed, he entered his home, absorbed in thought;
and having seen him thus return a second time, the king himself entered the city.

49. Having heard the occasion of the prince’s return he felt himself as deserted by him, and,
although unused to severe punishment, even when displeased, he rebuked him whose duty it
was to see that the road was clear.

50. And once more he arranged for his son all kinds of worldly enjoyments to their highest point;
imploring in his heart, ‘Would that he might not be able to forsake us, even though
rendered unable only through the restlessness of his senses.’

51. But when in the women’s apartments his son found no pleasure in the several objects of the
senses, sweet sounds and the rest, he gave orders for another progress outside, thinking
to himself, ‘It may create a diversion of sentiment.’

52. And in his affection pondering on the condition of his son, never thinking of any ills that
might come from his haste, he ordered the best singing-women to be in attendance, as well-skilled
in all the soft arts that can please.

53. Then the royal road being specially adorned and guarded, the king once more made the prince
go out, having ordered the charioteer and chariot to proceed in a contrary direction (to
the previous one).

54. But as the king’s son was thus going on his way, the very same deities created a dead man,
and only the charioteer and the prince, and none else, beheld him as he was carried dead
along the road.

55. Then spoke the prince to the charioteer, ‘Who is this borne by four men, followed by mournful
companions, who is bewailed, adorned but no longer breathing?’

56. Then the driver,--having his mind overpowered by the gods who possess pure minds and pure
dwellings,--himself knowing the truth, uttered to his lord this truth also which was not
to be told:

57. ‘This is some poor man who, bereft of his intellect, senses, vital airs and qualities, lying
asleep and unconscious, like mere wood or straw, is abandoned alike by friends and enemies
after they have carefully swathed and guarded him.’

58. Having heard these words of the charioteer he was somewhat startled and said to him, ‘Is
this an accident peculiar to him alone, or is such the end of all living creatures?’

59. Then the charioteer replied to him, ‘This is the final end of all living creatures; be it
a mean man, a man of middle state, or a noble, destruction is fixed to all in this world.’

60. Then the king’s son, sedate though he was, as soon as he heard of death, immediately sank
down overwhelmed, and pressing the end of the chariotpole with his shoulder spoke with a
loud voice,

