41. Another, wishing to argue with him, seizing a mango-spray, asked, all bewildered with passion,
‘This flower, whose is it?’

42. Another, assuming a gait and attitude like those of a man, said to him, ‘Thou who art conquered
by women, go and conquer this earth!’

43. Then another with rolling eyes, smelling a blue lotus, thus addressed the prince with words
slightly indistinct in her excitement,

44. ‘See, my lord, this mango covered with its honey-scented flowers, where the kokila sings,
as if imprisoned in a golden cage.

45. ‘Come and see this asoka tree, which augments lovers’ sorrows,--where the bees make a noise
as if they were scorched by fire.

46. ‘Come and see this tilaka tree, embraced by a slender mango-branch, like a man in a white
garment by a woman decked with yellow unguents.

47. ‘Behold this kuruvaka in flower, bright like fresh resin-juice, which bends down as if it
felt reproached by the colour of women’s nails.

48. ‘Come and see this young asoka, covered all over with new shoots, which stands as it were
ashamed at the beauty of our hands.

49. ‘See this lake surrounded by the sinduvâra shrubs growing on its banks, like a fair woman
reclining, clad in fine white cloth.

50. ‘See the imperial power of females,--yonder ruddy-goose in the water goes behind his mate
following her like a slave.

51. ‘Come and listen to the notes of this intoxicated cuckoo as he sings, while another cuckoo
sings as if consenting, wholly without care.

52. ‘Would that thine was the intoxication of the birds which the spring produces,--and not
the thought of a thinking man, ever pondering how wise he is!’

53. Thus these young women, their souls carried away by love, assailed the prince with all kinds
of stratagems.

54. But although thus attacked, he, having his senses guarded by self-control, neither rejoiced
nor smiled, thinking anxiously, ‘One must die.’

55. Having seen them in their real condition, that best of men pondered with an undisturbed,
and stedfast mind.

56. ‘What is it that these women lack that they perceive not that youth is fickle? for this
old age will destroy whatever has beauty.

57. ‘Verily they do not see any one’s plunge into disease, and so dismissing fear, they are
joyous in a world which is all pain.

58. ‘Evidently they know nothing of death which carries all away; and so at ease and without
distress they can sport and laugh.

59. ‘What rational being, who knows of old age, death and sickness, could stand or sit down
at his ease or sleep, far less laugh?

60. ‘But he verily is like one bereft of sense, who, beholding another aged or sick or dead,
remains self-possessed and not afflicted.

