61. ‘(So) even when a tree is deprived of its flowers and fruits, or if it is cut down and falls,
no other tree sorrows.’

62. Seeing him thus absorbed in contemplation, with his desires estranged from all worldly objects,
Udâyin, well skilled in the rules of policy, with kindly feelings addressed him:

63. ‘Since I was appointed by the king as a fitting friend for thee, therefore I have a wish
to speak to thee in this friendliness of my heart.

64. ‘To hinder from what is disadvantageous, to urge to what is advantageous--and not to forsake
in misfortune,--these are the three marks of a friend.

65. ‘If I, after having promised my friendship, were not to heed when thou turnest away from
the great end of man, there would be no friendship in me.

66. ‘Therefore I speak as thy friend,--such rudeness as this to women is not befitting for one
young in years and graceful in person.

67. ‘It is right to woo a woman even by guile, this is useful both for getting rid of shame
and for one’s own enjoyment.

68. ‘Reverential behaviour and compliance with her wishes are what binds a woman’s heart; good
qualities truly are a cause of love, and women love respect.

69. ‘Wilt thou not then, O large-eyed prince, even if thy heart is unwilling, seek to please
them with a courtesy worthy of this beauty of thine?

70. ‘Courtesy is the balm of women, courtesy is the best ornament; beauty without courtesy is
like a grove without flowers.

71. ‘But of what use is courtesy by itself? let it be assisted by the heart’s feelings; surely,
when worldly objects so hard to attain are in thy grasp, thou wilt not despise them.

72. ‘Knowing that pleasure was the best of objects, even the god Puraüdara (Indra) wooed in
olden time Ahalyâ the wife of the saint Gautama.

73. ‘So too Agastya wooed Rohinî, the wife of Soma; and therefore, as Sruti saith, a like thing
befell Lopâmudrâ.

74. ‘The great ascetic Vrihaspati begot Bharadvâja on Mamatâ the daughter of the Maruts, the
wife of Autathya.

75. ‘The Moon, the best of offerers, begat Budha of divine nature on the spouse of Vrihaspati
as she was offering a libation.

76. ‘So too in old time Parâsara, overpowered by passion on the bank of the Yamunâ, lay with
the maiden Kâlî who was the daughter of the son of the Water (Agni).

77. ‘The sage Vasishtha through lust begot a son Kapiÿjalâda on Akshamâlâ a despised low-caste
woman.

78. ‘And the seer-king Yayâti, even when the vigour of his prime was gone, sported in the Caitraratha
forest with the Apsaras Visvâcî.

79. ‘And the Kaurava king Pânḍu, though he knew that intercourse with his wife would end in
death, yet overcome by the beauty and good qualities of Mâdrî yielded to the pleasures of
love.

80. ‘And so Karâlajanaka, when he carried off the Brâhman’s daughter, incurred loss of caste
thereby, but he would not give up his love.

