1. Then from that city-garden, with their eyes restless in excitement, the women went out to
meet the prince as a newly-arrived bridegroom;

2. And when they came up to him, their eyes wide open in wonder, they performed their due homage
with hands folded like a lotus-calyx.

3. Then they stood surrounding him, their minds overpowered by passion, as if they were drinking
him in with their eyes motionless and blossoming wide with love.

4. Some of the women verily thought that he was Kâma incarnate,--decorated as he was with his
brilliant signs as with connate ornaments.

5. Others thought from his gentleness and majesty that it was the moon with its ambrosial beams
as it were visibly come down to the earth.

6. Others, smitten by his beauty, yawned as if to swallow him, and fixing their eyes on each
other, softly sighed.

7. Thus the women only looked upon him, simply gazing with their eyes,--they spoke not, nor
did they smile, controlled by his power.

8. But having seen them thus listless, bewildered in their love, the wise son of the family
priest, Udâyin, thus addressed them:

9. ‘Ye are all skilled in all the graceful arts, proficients in understanding the language of
amorous sentiments, possessed of beauty and gracefulness, thorough masters in your own styles.

10. ‘With these graces of yours ye may embellish even the Northern Kurus, yea, even the dances
of Kuvera, much more this little earth.

11. ‘Ye are able to move even sages who have lost all their desires, and to ensnare even the
gods who are charmed by heavenly nymphs.

12. ‘By your skill in expressing the heart’s feelings, by your coquetry, your grace, and your
perfect beauty, ye are able to enrapture even women, how much more easily men.

13. ‘You thus skilled as ye are, each set in her own proper sphere,--such as this is your power,
I am not satisfied with your simplicity [when you profess to find him beyond your reach].

14. ‘This timid action of yours would be fit for new brides, their eyes closed through shame,--or
it might be a blandishment worthy even of the wives of the cowherds.

15. ‘What though this hero be great by his exalted glory, yet "great is the might of women,"
let this be your firm resolve.

16. ‘In olden time a great seer, hard to be conquered even by the gods, was spurned by a harlot,
the beauty of Kâsi, planting her feet upon him.

17. ‘The Bhikshu Manthâlagautama was also formerly spurned by Bâlamukhyâ with her leg, and wishing
to please her he carried out dead bodies for her sake to be buried.

18. ‘And a woman low in standing and caste fascinated the great seer Gautama, though a master
of long penances and old in years.

19. ‘So Sântâ by her various wiles captivated and subdued the sage’s son ṛshyasriṅga, unskilled
in women’s ways.

20. ‘And the great seer Visvâmitra, though plunged in a profound penance, was carried captive
for ten years in the forests by the nymph Ghritâcî.

