21. ‘Many such seers as these have women brought to shame--how much more then a delicate prince
in the first flower of his age?

22. ‘This being so, boldly put forth your efforts that the prosperity of the king’s family may
not be turned away from him.

23. ‘Ordinary women captivate similar lovers; but they are truly women who subdue the natures
of high and low.’

24. Having heard these words of Udâyin these women as stung to the heart rose even above themselves
for the conquest of the prince.

25. With their brows, their glances, their coquetries, their smiles, their delicate movements,
they made all sorts of significant gestures like women utterly terrified.

26. But they soon regained their confidence through the command of the king and the gentle temperament
of the prince, and through the power of intoxication and of love.

27. Then surrounded by troops of women the prince wandered in the wood like an elephant in the
forests of Himavat accompanied by a herd of females.

28. Attended by the women he shone in that pleasant grove, as the sun surrounded by Apsarasas
in his royal garden.

29. There some of them, urged by passion, pressed him with their full firm bosoms in gentle
collisions.

30. Another violently embraced him after making a pretended stumble,--leaning on him with her
shoulders drooping down, and with her gentle creeper-like arms dependent.

31. Another with her mouth smelling of spirituous liquor, her lower lip red like copper, whispered
in his ear, ‘Let my secret be heard.’

32. Another, all wet with unguents, as if giving him her command, clasped his hand eagerly and
said, ‘Perform thy rites of adoration here.’

33. Another, with her blue garments continually slipping down in pretended intoxication, stood
conspicuous with her tongue visible like the night with its lightning flashing.

34. Others, with their golden zones tinkling, wandered about here and there, showing to him
their hips veiled with thin cloth.

35. Others leaned, holding a mango-bough in full flower, displaying their bosoms like golden
jars.

36. Another, coming from a lotus-bed, carrying lotuses and with eyes like lotuses, stood like
the lotus-goddess Padmâ, by the side of that lotus-faced prince.

37. Another sang a sweet song easily understood and with the proper gesticulations, rousing
him, self-subdued though he was, by her glances, as saying, ‘O how thou art deluded!’

38. Another, having armed herself with her bright face, with its brow-bow drawn to its full,
imitated his action, as playing the hero.

39. Another, with beautiful full bosoms, and having her earrings waving in the wind, laughed
loudly at him, as if saying, ‘Catch me, sir, if you can!’

40. Some, as he was going away, bound him with strings of garlands,--others punished him with
words like an elephant-driver’s hook, gentle yet reproachful.

