41. ‘The golden palace seems to me to be on fire; the daintiest viands seem mixed with poison;
infested with crocodiles [is the tranquil lotus-bed].’

42. And thus kingship is neither pleasure nor dharma, so that the kings of old, when age came
on with it’s unavoidable suffering, felt disgust and, giving up their kingdoms, betook themselves
to the forest.1

43. For it is better to eat herbs in the forest, embracing the highest contentmentas if one
were concealing a jewel, than to live with the dangers to which sovereignty is exposed, as
if with loathsome black snakes.

44. For it is praiseworthy for kings to leave their kingdoms and enter the forest in the desire
for dharma, but it is not fitting to break one’s vow and forsaking the forest to go to
one’s home.

45. For what man of resolution and good family, having once gone to the forest in the desire
for dharma, would cast off the robe and, dead to shame, proceed to the city even of Puraüdara?

46. For only the man, who from greed, delusion or fear, would take again the food he has vomited
up, would from greed, delusion or fear, abondon the lusts of the flesh and then return
to them.

47. And the man who, after escaping with difficulty from a burning house, would enter that very
house again, only he, after giving up the state of a householder, because he sees its
dangers, would desire out of delusion to assume it again.

48. As for the tradition that kings obtained final emancipation while remaining in their homes,
this is not the case. How can the dharma of salvation in which quietude predominates be
reconciled with the dharma of kings in which severity of action predominates?

49. If a king delights in quietude, his kingdom collapses; if his mind turns to his kingdom,
his quietude is ruined. For quietude and severity are incompatible, like the union of water
which is cold and fire which is hot.

50. Either therefore these lords of the earth resolutely cast aside their kingdoms and obtained
quietude, or stained by kingship, the claimed to have attained liberation on the ground
that their senses were under control, but in fact only reached a state that was not final.

51. Or let it be conceded they duly attained quitude while holding kingship, still I have not
gone to the forest with an undecided mind; for having cut through the net known as home
and kindred I am freed and have no intention of re-entering the net."

42. Having heard the king’s son uttering this discourse, well suitable to his virtues and knowledge
of the soul, freed from all desires, full of sound reasons, and weighty,--the counsellor
thus made answer:

43. ‘This resolve of thine is an excellent counsel, not unfit in itself but only unfit at the
present time; it could not be thy duty, loving duty as thou dost, to leave thy father in
his old age to sorrow.

44. ‘Surely thy mind is not very penetrating, or it is ill-skilled in examining duty, wealth,
and pleasure,--when for the sake of an unseen result thou departest disregarding a visible
end.

45. ‘Again, some say that there is another birth,--others with confident assertion say that
there is not; since then the matter is all in doubt, it is right to enjoy the good fortune
which comes into thy hand.

46. ‘If there is any activity hereafter, we will enjoy ourselves in it as may offer; or if there
is no activity beyond this life, then there is an assured liberation to all the world
without any effort.

47. ‘Some say there is a future life, but they do not allow the possibility of liberation; as
fire is hot by nature and water liquid, so they hold that there is a special nature in our
power of action.

48. ‘Some maintain that all things arise from inherent properties,--both good and evil and existence
and non-existence; and since all this world thus arises spontaneously, therefore
also all effort of ours is vain.

49. ‘Since the action of the senses is fixed, and so too the agreeableness or the disagreeableness
of outward objects,--then for that which is united to old age and pains, what effort
can avail to alter it? Does it not all arise spontaneously?

50. ‘The fire becomes quenched by water, and fire causes water to evaporate; and different elements,
united in a body, producing unity, bear up the world.

