21. ‘"Know that all these great kings who were householders were well skilled in attaining the
merit which leads to final bliss,--do thou also therefore obtain both simultaneously--royal
magnificence and the control over the mind.

22. ‘"I desire,--when I have once closely embraced thee after thy kingly consecration is once
performed, and while thou art still wet with the sacred water,--when I behold thee with
the pomp of the royal umbrella,--in the fulness of that joy to enter the forest."

23. ‘Thus did the king say to thee in a speech whose words were stopped by tears,--surely having
heard it, for the sake of what is so dear to him, thou wilt with all affection follow
his affection.

24. ‘The king of the Sâkyas is drowned in a deep sea of sorrow, full of waves of trouble, springing
from thee; do thou therefore deliver him helpless and protectorless like an ox drowning
in the sea.

25. ‘Having heard that Bhîshma who sprang from Gaṅgâ’s womb, Râma, and Râma the son of Bhrigu,--all
did what would please their fathers; surely thou too wilt do thy father’s desire.

26. ‘Consider also the queen, who brought thee up, who has not yet gone to the region inhabited
by Agastya--wilt thou not take some heed of her, who ceaselessly grieves like a fond cow
that has lost her calf?

27. ‘Surely thou wilt succour thy wife by the sight of thee, who now mourns widowed yet with
her lord still alive,--like a swan separated from her mate or a female elephant deserted
in the forest by her companion.

28. ‘Thy only son, a child little deserving such woe, distressed with sorrow, and [.. .. ..
.. ..]--O deliver Râhula from the grief of his kindred like the full moon from the contact
of Râhu!

29. ‘Burned with the fire of anguish within him, to which thy absence adds fresh fuel,--a fire
whose smoke is sighs and its flame despair,--he wanders for a sight of thee through the
women’s apartments and the whole city.’

30. The Bodhisattva,--whose perfection was absolute,--having heard the words of the family priest,
reflected for a moment, knowing all the virtues of the virtuous, and then thus uttered
his gentle reply:

31. ‘I well know the paternal tenderness of the king, especially that which he has displayed
towards me; yet knowing this as I do, still alarmed at sickness, old age, and death, I am
inevitably forced to leave my kindred.

32. ‘Who would not wish to see his dear kindred, if but this separation from beloved ones did
not exist? but since even after it has been once, separation will still come again, it is
for this that I abandon my father, however loving.

33. ‘I do not however approve that thou shouldst consider the king’s grief as caused by me,
when in the midst of his dream-like unions he is afflicted by thoughts of separations in the
future.

34. ‘Thus let thy thoughts settle into certainty, having seen the multiform in its various developments;
neither a son nor kindred is the cause of sorrow,--this sorrow is only caused
by ignorance.

35. ‘Since parting is inevitably fixed in the course of time for all beings, just as for travellers
who have joined company on a road,--what wise man would cherish sorrow, when he loses
his kindred, even though he loves them?

36. ‘Leaving his kindred in another world, he departs hither; and having stolen away from them
here, he goes forth once more; "having gone thither, go thou elsewhere also,"--such is
the lot of mankind,--what consideration can the yogin have for them?

37. ‘Since from the moment of leaving the womb death is a characteristic adjunct, why, in thy
affection for thy son, hast thou called my departure to the forest ill-timed?

38. ‘There may be an "ill time" in one’s attaining a worldly object,--time indeed is described
as inseparably connected with all things; time drags the world into all its various times;
but all time suits a bliss which is really worthy of praise.

39. ‘That the king should wish to surrender to me his kingdorn,--this is a noble thought, well
worthy of a father; but it would be as improper for me to accept it, as for a sick man
through greed to accept unwholesome food.

40. ‘How can it be right for the wise man to enter royalty, the home of illusion, where are
found anxiety, passion, and weariness, and the violation of all right through another’s service?

