51. ‘That the nature of the embryo in the womb is produced as composed of hands, feet, belly,
back, and head, and that it is also united with the soul,--the wise declare that all this
comes of itself spontaneously.

52. ‘Who causes the sharpness of the thorn? or the various natures of beasts and birds? All
this has arisen spontaneously; there is no acting from desire, how then can there be such
a thing as will?

53. ‘Others say that creation comes from äsvara, what need then is there of the effort of the
conscious soul? That which is the cause of the action of the world, is also determined as
the cause of its ceasing to act.

54. ‘Some say that the coming into being and the destruction of being are alike caused by the
soul, but they say that coming into being arises without effort, while the attainment of
liberation is by effort.

55. ‘A man discharges his debt to his ancestors by begetting offspring, to the saints by sacred
lore, to the gods by sacrifices; he is born with these three debts upon him,--whoever
has liberation (from these,) he indeed has liberation.

56. ‘Thus by this series of rules the wise promise liberation to him who uses effort; but however
ready for effort with all their energy, those who seek liberation will find weariness.

57. ‘Therefore, gentle youth, if thou hast a love for liberation, follow rightly the prescribed
rule; thus wilt thou thyself attain to it, and the king’s grief will come to an end.

58. ‘And as for thy meditations on the evils of life ending in thy return from the forest to
thy home,--let not the thought of this trouble thee, my son,--those in old time also have
returned from the forests to their houses.

59. ‘The king Ambarîsha, though he had dwelt in the forest, went back to the city, surrounded
by his children; so too Râma, seeing the earth oppressed by the base, came forth from his
hermitage and ruled it again.

60. ‘So too Drumâksha, the king of the Sâlvas, came to his city from the forest with his son;
and Sâükriti Antideva, after he had become a Brahmarshi, received his royal dignity from
the saint Vasishtha.’

61. ‘Such men as these, illustrious in glory and virtue, left the forests and came back to their
houses; therefore it is no sin to return from a hermitage to one’s home, if it be only
for the sake of duty.’

62. Then having heard the affectionate and loyal words of the minister, who was as the eye of
the king,--firm in his resolve, the king’s son made his answer, with nothing omitted or
displaced, neither tedious nor hasty:

63. ‘This doubt whether anything exists or not, is not to be solved for me by another’s words;
having determined the truth by asceticism or quietism, I will myself grasp whatever is
ascertained concerning it.

64. ‘It is not for me to accept a theory which depends on the unknown and is all controverted,
and which involves a hundred prepossessions; what wise man would go by another’s belief?
Mankind are like the blind directed in the darkness by the blind.

65. ‘But even though I cannot discern the truth, yet still, if good and evil are doubted, let
one’s mind be set on the good; even a toil in vain is to be chosen by him whose soul is
good, while the man of base soul has no joy even in the truth.

66. ‘But having seen that this "sacred tradition" is uncertain, know that that only is right
which has been uttered by the trustworthy; and know that trustworthiness means the absence
of faults; he who is without faults will not utter an untruth.

67. ‘And as for what thou saidst to me in regard to my returning to my home, by alleging Râma
and others as examples, they are no authority,--for in determining duty, how canst thou
quote as authorities those who have broken their vows?

68. ‘Even the sun, therefore, may fall to the earth, even the mountain Himavat may lose its
firmness; but never would I return to my home as a man of the world, with no knowledge of
the truth and my senses only alert for external objects.

69. ‘I would enter the blazing fire, but not my house with my purpose unfulfilled.’ Thus he
proudly made his resolve, and rising up in accordance with it, full of disinterestedness,
went his way.

70. Then the minister and the Brâhman, both full of tears, having heard his firm determination,
and having followed him awhile with despondent looks, and overcome with sorrow, slowly
returned of necessity to the city.

