1. Then the two, the counsellor and the family priest, beaten by the king with his scourge of
tears, went with every effort to that forest in the hurry of affection, like two noble horses
goaded.

2. Having come at last full of weariness to that hermitage, accompanied by a fitting train,--they
dismissed their royal pomp and with sober gestures entered the abode of Bhârgava.

3. Having saluted that Brâhman with due respect, and having been honoured by him with due reverence
in return, having seated themselves, plunging at once into the subject, they addressed
Bhârgava, who was likewise seated, concerning their errand.

4. ‘Let your honour know us to be respectively imperfect proficients in preserving the sacred
learning and in retaining the state-counsels,--in the service of the monarch of the Ikshvâku
race, pure in his valour and pure and wide in his glory.

5. ‘His son, who is like Jayanta, while he himself is like Indra, has come here, it is said,
desirous to escape from the fear of old age and death,--know that we two are come here on
account of him.’

6. He answered them, ‘That prince of the long arms did indeed come here, but not as one unawakened;
"this dharma only brings us back again,"--recognising this, he went off forthwith
towards Arâḍa, seeking liberation.’

7. Then they two, having understood the true state of things, bade that Brâhman at once farewell,
and wearied though they were, went on as if they were unwearied, thither whither the
prince was gone.

8. As they were going, they saw him bereft of all ornaments, but still radiant with his beauty,
sitting like a king in the road at the foot of a tree, like the sun under the canopy of
a cloud.

9. Leaving his chariot, the family priest then went up to the prince with the counsellor, as
the saint Aurvaseya went with Vâmadeva, wishing to see Râma when he dwelt in the forest.

10. They paid him honour as was fitting, as Sukra and Aṅgiras honoured Indra in heaven; and
he in return paid due honour to them, as Indra in heaven to Sukra and Aṅgiras.

11. Then they, having obtained his permission, sat down near him who was the banner of the Sâkya
race; and they shone in his proximity like the two stars of the asterism Punarvasû in
conjunction with the moon.

12. The family priest addressed the prince who shone brightly as he sat at the foot of the tree,
as Vrihaspati addressed Indra’s son Jayanta, seated in heaven under the heavenly tree
pârijâta:

13. ‘O prince, consider for a moment what the king with his eyes raining tears said to thee,
as he lay fainting on the ground with the arrow of thy sorrow plunged into his heart.

14. ‘"I know that thy resolve is fixed upon religion, and I am convinced that this purpose of
thine is unchanging; but I am consumed with a flame of anguish like fire at thy flying to
the woods at an inopportune time.

15. ‘"Come, thou who lovest duty, for the sake of what is my heart’s desire,--abandon this purpose
for the sake of duty; this huge swollen stream of sorrow sweeps me away as a river’s
torrent its bank.

16. ‘"That effect which is wrought in the clouds, water, the dry grass, and the mountains by
the wind, the sun, the fire, and the thunderbolt,--that same effect this grief produces in
us by its tearing in pieces, its drying up, its burning, and its cleaving.

17. ‘"Enjoy therefore for a while the sovereignty of the earth,--thou shalt go to the forest
at the time provided by the sâstras,--do not show disregard for thy unhappy kindred,--compassion
for all creatures is the true religion.

18. ‘"Religion is not wrought out only in the forests, the salvation of ascetics can be accomplished
even in a city; thought and effort are the true means; the forest and the badge are
only a coward’s signs.

19. ‘"Liberation has been attained even by householders, Indras among men, who wore diadems,
and carried strings of pearls suspended on their shoulders, whose garlands were entangled
with bracelets, and who lay cradled in the lap of Fortune.

20. ‘"Bali and Vajrabâhu, the two younger brothers of Dhruva, Vaibhrâja, âshâḍha and Antideva,
and Ganaka also, the king of the Videhas, and king Senajit’s son, his tree of ripe blessing;

