61. Another, with fully-developed limbs, her mouth wide open, her saliva dropping, and her person
exposed, lay as though sprawling in intoxication,--she spoke not, but bore every limb
distorted.

62. Thus that company of women, lying in different attitudes, according to their disposition
and family, bore the aspect of a lake whose lotuses were bent down and broken by the wind.

63. Then having seen these young women thus lying distorted and with uncontrolled gestures,
however excellent their forms and graceful their appearance,--the king’s son felt moved with
scorn.

64. ‘Such is the nature of women, impure and monstrous in the world of living beings; but deceived
by dress and ornaments a man becomes infatuated by a woman’s attractions.

65. ‘If a man would but consider the natural state of women and this change produced in them
by sleep, assuredly he would not cherish his folly; but he is smitten from a right will and
so succumbs to passion.’

66. Thus to him having recognised that difference there arose a desire to escape in the night;
and then the gods, knowing his purpose, caused the door of the palace to fly open.

67. Then he went down from the roof of the palace, scorning those women who lay thus distorted;
and having descended, undauntedly he went out first into the courtyard.

68. Having awakened his horse’s attendant, the swift Chandaka, he thus addressed him: ‘Bring
me quickly my horse Kanthaka, I wish to-day to go hence to attain immortality.

69. ‘Since such is the firm content which to-day is produced in my heart, and since my determination
is settled in calm resolve, and since even in loneliness I seem to possess a guide,--verily
the end which I desire is now before me.

70. ‘Since abandoning all shame and modesty these women lay before me as they did, and the two
doors opened of their own accord, verily the time is come to depart for my true health.’

71. Then, accepting his lord’s command, though he knew the purport of the king’s injunctions,
as being urged by a higher power in his mind, he set himself to bring the horse.

72. Then he brought out for his master that noble steed, his mouth furnished with a golden bit,
his back lightly touched by the bed on which he had been lying, and endued with strength,
vigour, speed, and swiftness;

73. With a long chine, and root of the tail and heel,--gentle, with short hair, back, and ears,--with
his back, belly, and sides depressed and elevated, with broad nostrils, forehead,
hips, and breast.

74. The broad-chested hero, having embraced him, and caressing him with his lotus-like hand,
ordered him with a gentle-toned voice, as if he were desirous to plunge into the middle of
an army:

75. ‘Oftentimes have evil enemies been overthrown by the king when mounted on thee; do thou,
O best of steeds, so exert thyself that I too may obtain the highest immortality.

76. ‘Companions are easy to be found in battle or in the happiness obtained by winning worldly
objects or in attaining wealth; but companions are hard for a man to find who has fallen
into misfortune or when he flies for refuge to Dharma.

77. ‘And yet all those who in this world are companions, whether in sinful custom or in seeking
for Dharma,--as my inner soul now recognises,--they too are verily sharers in the common
aim.

78. ‘Since then, when I attain this righteous end, my escape from hence will be for the good
of the world,--O best of steeds, by thy speed and energy, strive for thine own good and the
good of the world.’

79. Thus having exhorted the best of steeds like a friend to his duty, he, the best of men,
longing to go to the forest, wearing a noble form, in brightness like fire, mounted the white
horse as the sun an autumnal cloud.

80. Then that good steed, avoiding all noises which would sound startling in the dead of night
and awaken the household,--all sound of his jaws hushed and his neighing silenced,--went
forth, planting his hurrying steps at full speed.

