41. There he was gazed at by his wives with restless eyes, whose faces were kissed by their
dangling earrings, and whose bosoms were shaken with their thick-coming sighs,--as by so many
young fawns.

42. Bright like a golden mountain, and bewitching the hearts of the noble women, he enraptured
their ears, limbs, eyes, and souls by his speech, touch, form, and qualities.

43. When the day was gone, then, shining with his form like the sun, he ascended the palace,
as the rising sun ascends Mount Meru, desiring to dispel the darkness by his own splendour.

44. Having ascended, he repaired to a special golden seat decorated with embellishments of diamond,
with tall lighted candlesticks ablaze with gold, and its interior filled with the
incense of black aloe-wood.

45. Then the noblest of women waited during the night on the noblest of men who was like Indra
himself, with a concert of musical instruments, as the crowds of heavenly nymphs wait on
the son of the Lord of wealth upon the summit of Himavat, white like the moon.

46. But even by those beautiful instruments like heavenly music he was not moved to pleasure
or delight; since his desire to go forth from his home to seek the bliss of the highest end
was never lulled.

47. Then by the power of the heavenly beings most excellent in self-mortification, the Akanishthas,
who knew the purpose of his heart, deep sleep was suddenly thrown on that company
of women and their limbs and gestures became distorted.

48. One was lying there, resting her cheek on her trembling arm; leaving as in anger her lute,
though dearly loved, which lay on her side, decorated with gold-leaf.

49. Another shone with her flute clinging to her hand, lying with her white garments fallen
from her bosom,--like a river whose banks are smiling with the foam of the water and whose
lotuses are covered with a straight line of bees.

50. Another was sleeping, embracing her drum as a lover, with her two arms tender like the shoot
of young lotus and bearing their bracelets closely linked, blazing with gold.

51. Others, decked with new golden ornaments and wearing peerless yellow garments, fell down
alas! helpless with sleep, like the boughs of the Karnikâra broken by an elephant.

52. Another, leaning on the side of a window, with her willow-form bent like a bow, shone as
she lay with her beautiful necklace hanging down, like a statue in an archway made by art.

53. The lotus-face of another, bowed down, with the pinguent-lines on her person rubbed by the
jewelled earrings, appeared to be a lotus with its stalk bent into a half-circle, and shaken
by a duck standing on it.

54. Others, lying as they sat, with their limbs oppressed by the weight of their bosoms, shone
in their beauty, mutually clasping one another with their twining arms decorated with golden
bracelets.

55. And another damsel lay sound asleep, embracing her big lute as if it were a female friend,
and rolled it about, while its golden strings trembled, with her own face bright with her
shaken earrings.

56. Another lay, with her tabour,

57. Others showed no lustre with their eyes shut, although they were really full-eyed and fair-browed,--like
the lotus-beds with their buds closed at the setting of the sun.

58. Another, with her hair loose and dishevelled, and her skirts and ornaments fallen from her
loins, lay with her necklace in confusion, like a woman crushed by an elephant and then
dropped.

59. Others, helpless and lost to shame, though naturally self-possessed and endued with all
graces of person, breathed violently as they lay and yawned with their arms distorted and
tossed about.

60. Others, with their ornaments and garlands thrown off,--unconscious, with their garments
spread out unfastened,--their bright eyes wide open and motionless,--lay without any beauty
as if they were dead.

