21. When the other was gone like a bird to heaven, the foremost of men was rejoiced and astonished;
and having comprehended the meaning of the term dharma, he set his mind on the manner
of the accomplishment of deliverance.

22. Then like Indra himself, and having tamed his senses,--desiring to return home he mounted
his noble steed; and having made him turn back as he looked for his friends, from that moment
he sought no more the desired forest.

23. Ever seeking to make an end of old age and death, fixing his thoughts in memory on dwelling
in the woods, he entered the city again but with no feelings of longing, like an elephant
entering an exercise-ground after roaming in a forest-land.

24. ‘Happy truly and blessed is that woman whose husband is such as thou, O long-eyed prince!’
So, on seeing him, the princess exclaimed, folding her hands to welcome him, as he entered
the road.

25. He whose voice was deep-sounding like a cloud heard this address and was filled with profound
calm; and as he heard the word ‘blessed’ he fixed his mind on the attainment of Nirvâna.

26. Then the prince whose form was like the peak of a golden mountain,--whose eye, voice, and
arm resembled a bull, a cloud, and an elephant,--whose countenance and prowess were like
the moon and a lion,--having a longing aroused for something imperishable,--went into his
palace.

27. Then stepping like a lion he went towards the king who was attended by his numerous counsellors,
like Sanatkumâra in heaven waiting on Indra resplendent in the assembly of the Maruts.

28. Prostrating himself, with folded hands, he addressed him, ‘Grant me graciously thy permission,
O lord of men,--I wish to become a wandering mendicant for the sake of liberation,
since separation is appointed for me.’

29. Having heard his words, the king shook like a tree struck by an elephant, and having seized
his folded hands which were like a lotus, he thus addressed him in a voice choked with
tears:

30. ‘O my son, keep back this thought, it is not the time for thee to betake thyself to dharma;
they say that the practice of religion is full of evils in the first period of life when
the mind is still fickle.

31. ‘The mind of the thoughtless ignorant young man whose senses are eager for worldly objects,
and who has no power of settled resolution for the hardships of vows of penance, shrinks
back from the forest, for it is especially destitute of discrimination.

32. ‘It is high time for me to practise religion, O my child of loved qualities, leaving my
royal glory to thee who art well worthy to be distinguished by it; but thy religion, O firm-striding
hero, is to be accomplished by heroism; it would be irreligion if thou wert to
leave thine own father.

33. ‘Do thou therefore abandon this thy resolution; devote thyself for the present to the duties
of a householder; to a man who has enjoyed the pleasures of his prime, it is delightful
to enter the penance-forest.’

34. Having heard these words of the king, he made his reply in a voice soft like a sparrow’s:
‘If thou wilt be my surety, O king, against four contingencies, I will not betake myself
to the forest.

35. ‘Let not my life be subject to death, and let not disease impair this health of mine; let
not old age attack my youth, and let not misfortune destroy my weal.’

36. When his son uttered a speech so hard to be understood, the king of the Sâkyas thus replied:
‘Abandon this idea bent upon departure; extravagant desires are only ridiculous.’

37. Then he who was firm as Mount Meru addressed his father: ‘If this is impossible, then this
course of mine is not to be hindered; it is not right to lay hold of one who would escape
from a house that is on fire.

38. ‘As separation is inevitable to the world, but not for Dharma, this separation is preferable;
will not death sever me helplessly, my objects unattained and myself unsatisfied?’

39. The monarch, having heard this resolve of his son longing for liberation, and having again
exclaimed, ‘He shall not go,’ set guards round him and the highest pleasures.

40. Then having been duly instructed by the counsellors, with all respect and affection, according
to the sâstras, and being thus forbidden with tears by his father, the prince, sorrowing,
entered into his palace.

