1. He, the son of the Sâkya king, even though thus tempted by the objects of sense which infatuate
others, yielded not to pleasure and felt not delight, like a lion deeply pierced in
his heart by a poisoned arrow.

2. Then one day accompanied by some worthy sons of his father’s ministers, friends full of varied
converse,--with a desire to see the glades of the forest and longing for peace, he went
out with the king’s permission.

3. Having mounted his good horse Kanthaka, decked with bells and bridle-bit of new gold, with
beautiful golden harness and the chowrie waving, he went forth like the moon mounted on
a comet.

4. Lured by love of the wood and longing for the beauties of the ground, he went to a spot near
at hand on the forest-outskirts; and there he saw a piece of land being ploughed, with
the path of the plough broken like waves on the water.

5. Having beheld the ground in this condition, with its young grass scattered and torn by the
plough, and covered with the eggs and young of little insects which were killed, he was
filled with deep sorrow as for the slaughter of his own kindred.

6. And beholding the men as they were ploughing, their complexions spoiled by the dust, the
sun’s rays, and the wind, and their cattle bewildered with the burden of drawing, the most
noble one felt extreme compassion.

7. Having alighted from the back of his horse, he went over the ground slowly, overcome with
sorrow,--pondering the birth and destruction of the world, he, grieved, exclaimed, ‘this
is indeed pitiable.’

8. Then desiring to become perfectly lonely in his thoughts, having stopped those friends who
were following him, he went to the root of a rose-apple in a solitary spot, which had its
beautiful leaves all tremulous (in the wind).

9. There he sat down on the ground covered with leaves, and with its young grass bright like
lapis lazuli; and, meditating on the origin and destruction of the world, he laid hold of
the path that leads to firmness of mind.

10. Having attained to firmness of mind, and being forthwith set free from all sorrows such
as the desire of worldly objects and the rest, he attained the first stage of contemplation,
unaffected by sin, calm, and ‘argumentative.’

11. Having then obtained the highest happiness sprung from deliberation, he next pondered this
meditation,--having thoroughly understood in his mind the course of the world:

12. ‘It is a miserable thing that mankind, though themselves powerless and subject to sickness,
old age, and death, yet, blinded by passion and ignorant, look with disgust on another
who is afflicted by old age or diseased or dead.

13. ‘If I here, being such myself, should feel disgust for another who has such a nature, it
would not be worthy or right in me who know this highest duty.’

14. As he thus considered thoroughly these faults of sickness, old age, and death which belong
to all living beings, all the joy which he had felt in the activity of his vigour, his
youth, and his life, vanished in a moment.

15. He did not rejoice, he did not feel remorse; he suffered no hesitation, indolence, nor sleep;
he felt no drawing towards the qualities of desire; he hated not nor scorned another.

16. Thus did this pure passionless meditation grow within the great-souled one; and unobserved
by the other men, there crept up a man in a beggar’s dress.

17. The king’s son asked him a question,--he said to him, ‘Tell me, who art thou?’ and the other
replied, ‘Oh bull of men, I, being terrified at birth and death, have become an ascetic
for the sake of liberation.

18. ‘Desiring liberation in a world subject to destruction, I seek that happy indestructible
abode, isolated from mankind, with my thoughts unlike those of others, and with my sinful
passions turned away from all objects of sense.

19. ‘Dwelling anywhere, at the root of a tree, or in an uninhabited house, a mountain or a forest,--I
wander without a family and without hope, a beggar ready for any fare, seeking only
the highest good.’

20. When he had thus spoken, while the prince was looking on, he suddenly flew up to the sky;
it was a heavenly inhabitant who, knowing that the prince’s thoughts were other than what
his outward form promised, had come to him for the sake of rousing his recollection.

