41. ‘Him who is always compassionate and who never fails to feel pity, it ill befits to abandon
one who loves,--turn back and have mercy on me.’

42. Having heard these words of Chanda overcome with sorrow,--self-possessed with the utmost
firmness the best of speakers answered:

43. ‘Abandon this distress, Chanda, regarding thy separation from me,--change is inevitable
in corporeal beings who are subject to different births.

44. ‘Even if I through affection were not to abandon my kindred in my desire for liberation,
death would still make us helplessly abandon one another.

45. ‘She, my mother, by whom I was borne in the womb with great thirst and pains,--where am
I now with regard to her, all her efforts fruitless, and where is she with regard to me?

46. ‘As birds go to their roosting-tree and then depart, so the meeting of beings inevitably
ends in separation.

47. ‘As clouds, having come together, depart asunder again, such I consider the meeting and
parting of living things.

48. ‘And since this world goes away, each one of us deceiving the other,--it is not right to
think anything thine own in a time of union which is a dream.

49. ‘Since the trees are parted from the innate colour of their leaves, why should there not
still more be the parting of two things which are alien to each other?

50. ‘Therefore, since it is so, grieve not, my good friend, but go; or if thy love lingers,
then go and afterwards return.

51. ‘Say, without reproaching us, to the people in Kapilavastu, ‘"Let your love for him be given
up, and hear his resolve.

52. ‘"Either he will quickly come back, having destroyed old age and death; or else he will
himself perish, having failed in his purpose and lost hold of every support."’

53. Having heard his words, Kanthaka, the noblest of steeds, licked his feet with his tongue
and dropped hot tears.

54. With his hand whose fingers were united with a membrane and which was marked with the auspicious
svastika, and with its middle part curved, the prince stroked him and addressed him
like a friend:

55. ‘Shed not tears, Kanthaka, this thy perfect equine nature has been proved,--bear with it,
this thy labour will soon have its fruit.’

56. Then seizing the sharp jewelled sword which was in Chandaka’s hand, he resolutely drew out
from the sheath the blade decked with golden ornaments, like a serpent from its hole.

57. Having drawn it forth, dark blue like a blue lotus petal, he cut his decorated tiara and
his hair, and he tossed it with its scattered muslin into the air as a grey goose into a
lake.

58. And the heavenly beings, with a longing to worship it, seized it respectfully as it was
thrown up; and the divine hosts paid it due adoration in heaven with celestial honours.

59. Having thus divorced his ornaments and banished all royal magnificence from his head, and
seeing his muslin floating away like a golden goose, the stedfast prince desired a sylvan
dress.

60. Then a celestial being, wearing the form of a hunter, pure in heart, knowing his thoughts,
approached near him in dark-red garments; and the son of the Sâkya king thus addressed
him:

