1. Then when the sun, the eye of the world, was just risen, he, the noblest of men, beheld the
hermitage of the son of Bhrigu,

2. Its deer all asleep in quiet trust, its birds tranquilly resting,--seeing it he too became
restful, and he felt as if his end was attained.

3. For the sake of ending his wonder and to show reverence for the penances observed, and as
expressing his own conformity therewith, he alighted from the back of his horse.

4. Having alighted, he stroked the horse, exclaiming, ‘All is saved,’ and he spoke well-pleased
to Chandaka, bedewing him as it were with tears from his eyes :

5. ‘Good friend, thy devotion to me and thy courage of soul have been proved by thy thus following
this steed whose speed is like that of Târkshya.

6. ‘Bent even though I am on other business, I am wholly won in heart by thee,--one who has
such a love for his master, and at the same time is able to carry out his wish.

7. ‘One can be able without affection, and affectionate though unable; but one like thee, at
once affectionate and able, is hard to find in the world.

8. ‘I am pleased with this noble action of thine; this feeling is seen towards me, even though
I am regardless of conferring rewards.

9. ‘Who would not be favourably disposed to one who stands to him as bringing him reward? but
even one’s own people commonly become mere strangers in a reverse of fortune.

10. ‘The son is maintained for the sake of the family, the father is honoured for the sake of
our own (future) support; the world shows kindness for the sake of hope; there is no such
a thing as unselfishness without a motive.

11. ‘Why speak many words? in short, thou hast done me a very great kindness; take now my horse
and return, I have attained the desired wood.’

12. Thus having spoken, the mighty hero in his desire to show perfect gentleness unloosed his
ornaments and gave them to the other, who was deeply grieved.

13. Having taken a brilliant jewel whose effect illumined his diadem, he stood, uttering these
words, like the mountain Mandara with the sun resting on it:

14. ‘By thee with this jewel, O Chanda, having offered him repeated obeisance, the king, with
his loving confidence still unshaken, must be enjoined to stay his grief.

15. ‘"I have entered the ascetic-wood to destroy old age and death,--with no thirst for heaven,
with no lack of love nor feeling of anger.

16. ‘"Do not think of mourning for me who am thus gone forth from my home; union, however long
it may last, in time will come to an end.

17. ‘"Since separation is certain, therefore is my mind fixed on liberation; how shall there
not be repeated severings from one’s kindred?

18. ‘"Do not think of mourning for me who am gone forth to leave sorrow behind; it is the thralls
of passion, who are attached to desires, the causes of sorrow, for whom thou shouldst
mourn.

19. ‘"This was the firm persuasion of our predecessors,--I as one departing by a common road
am not to be mourned for by my heir.

20. ‘"At a man’s death there are doubtless heirs to his wealth; but heirs to his merit are hard
to find on the earth or exist not at all.

