21. ‘"Even though thou sayest, ‘He is gone at a wrong time to the wood,’--there is no wrong
time for religious duty (dharma), life being fragile as it is.

22. ‘"Therefore my determination is, ‘I must seek my supreme good this very day;’ what confidence
can there be in life, when death stands as our adversary?"

23. ‘Do thou address the king, O friend, with these and such-like words; and do thou use thy
efforts so that he may not even remember me.

24. ‘Yea, do thou repeat to the king our utter unworthiness; through unworthiness affection
is lost,--and where affection is lost, there is no sorrow.’

25. Having heard these words, Chanda, overwhelmed with grief, made reply with folded hands,
his voice choked by tears :

26. ‘At this state of mind of thine, causing affliction to thy kindred, my mind, O my lord,
sinks down like an elephant in the mud of a river.

27. ‘To whom would not such a determination as this of thine cause tears, even if his heart
were of iron,--how much more if it were throbbing with love?

28. ‘Where is this delicacy of limb, fit to lie only in a palace,--and where is the ground of
the ascetic forest, covered with the shoots of rough kusa grass?

29. ‘When, on hearing thy resolve, I first brought thee this horse,--it was fate only, O my
lord, which made me do it, mastering my will.

30. ‘But how could I, O king, by mine own will, knowing this thy decision,--carry back the horse
to the sorrow of Kapilavastu?

31. ‘Surely thou wilt not abandon, O hero, that fond old king, so devoted to his son, as a heretic
might the true religion?

32. ‘And her, thy second mother, worn with the care of bringing thee up,--thou wilt not surely
forget her, as an ingrate a benefit?

33. ‘Thou wilt not surely abandon thy queen, endowed with all virtues, illustrious for her family,
devoted to her husband and with a young son, as a coward the royal dignity within his
reach?

34. ‘Thou wilt not abandon the young son of Yasodharâ, worthy of all praise, thou the best of
the cherishers of religion and fame, as a dissolute spendthrift his choicest glory?

35. ‘Or even if thy mind be resolved to abandon thy kindred and thy kingdom, thou wilt not,
O master, abandon me,--thy feet are my only refuge.

36. ‘I cannot go to the city with my soul thus burning, leaving thee behind in the forest as
Sumitra left the son of Raghu.

37. ‘What will the king say to me, returning to the city without thee? or what shall I say to
thy queens by way of telling them good news?

38. ‘As for what thou saidst, "thou must repeat my unworthiness to the king"--how shall I speak
what is false of thee as of a sage without a fault?

39. ‘Or even if I ventured to speak it with a heart ashamed and a tongue cleaving to my mouth,
who would think of believing it?

40. ‘He who would tell of or believe the fierceness of the moon, might tell of or believe thy
faults, O physician of faults.

