21. With their dress hanging down, and their linen garments soiled, their faces untouched by
collyrium and with eyes dimmed by tears; dark and discoloured and destitute of all painting,
like the stars in the sky, pale-red with the ending of night;

22. With their feet unstained by red, and undecked by anklets,--their faces without earrings,
and their ears in their native simplicity,--their loins with only nature’s fulness, and
uncircled by any girdle,--and their bosoms bare of strings of pearls as if they had been robbed.

23. But when they saw Chandaka standing helpless, his eyes filled with tears, and the horse,
the noble women wept with pale faces, like cows abandoned by the bull in the midst of the
forest.

24. Then the king’s principal queen Gautamî, like a fond cow that has lost her calf, fell bursting
into tears on the ground with outstretched arms, like a golden plantain-tree with trembling
leaves.

25. Some of the other women, bereft of their brightness and with arms and souls lifeless, and
seeming to have lost their senses in their despondency, raised no cry, shed no tear, and
breathed not, standing senseless as if painted.

26. Others as having lost all self-control, fainting in their sorrow for their lord, their faces
pouring tears from their eyes, watered their bosoms from which all sandal-wood was banished,
like a mountain the rocks with its streams.

27. Then that royal palace was illumined with their faces pelted by the tears from their eyes,
as a lake in the time of the first rains with its dripping lotuses pelted by the rain from
the clouds.

28. The noble women beat their breasts with their lotus-like hands, falling incessantly, whose
fingers were round and plump, which had their arteries hidden and bore no ornaments,--as
creepers tossed by the wind strike themselves with their shoots.

29. And again how those women shine forth, as their bosoms rose up together after the blow from
the hand, and trembled with the shock, like the streams, when their pairs of ruddy geese
shake, as the lotuses on which they sit wave about with the wind from the wood.

30. As they pressed their breasts with their hands, so too they pressed their hands with their
breasts,--dull to all feelings of pity, they made their hands and bosoms inflict mutual
pains on each other.

31. Then thus spoke Yasodharâ, shedding tears with deep sorrow, her bosom heaving with her sighs,
her eyes discoloured with aneer, and her voice choking with emotion through the influence
of despondency:

32. ‘Leaving me helplessly asleep in the night, whither, O Chandaka, is he, the desire of my
heart, gone? and when thou and Kanthaka are alone come back, while three went away together,
my mind trembles.

33. ‘Why dost thou weep to-day, O cruel one, having done a dishonourable, pitiless, and unfriendly
deed to me? Cease thy tears and be content in thy heart,--tears and that deed of thine
ill agree.

34. ‘Through thee, his dear obedient faithful loyal companion, always doing what was right,
the son of my lord is gone never to return,--rejoice,--all hail! thy pains have gained their
end.

35. ‘Better for a man a wise enemy rather than a foolish friend unskilled in emergencies; by
thee, the unwise self-styled friend, a great calamity has been brought upon this family.

36. ‘These women are sorely to be pitied who have put away their ornaments, having their eyes
red and dimmed with continuous tears, who are as it were desolate widows, though their lord
still stands as unshaken as the earth or Mount Himavat.

37. ‘And these lines of palaces seem to weep aloud, flinging up their dovecots for arms, with
the long unbroken moan of their doves,--separated verily, with him, from all who could restrain
them.

38. ‘Even that horse Kanthaka without doubt desired my utter ruin; for he bore away from hence
my treasure when all were sound asleep in the night,--like one who steals jewels.

39. ‘When he was able to bear even the onsets of arrows, and still more the strokes of whips,--how
then for fear of the fall of a whip, could he go carrying with him my prosperity and
my heart together?

40. ‘The base creature now neighs loudly, filling the king’s palace with the sound; but when
he carried away my beloved, then this vilest of horses was dumb.

