21. ‘Those who abandoning wealth, kindred, and worldly objects, undertake vows for the sake
of heaven,--they, when parted, only wish to go to a still greater wood of their own again.

22. ‘He who by all these bodily toils which are called penances, seeks a sphere of action for
the sake of desire,--not examining the inherent evils of mundane existence, he only seeks
pain by pain.

23. ‘There is ever to living creatures fear from death, and they with all their efforts seek
to be born again; where there is action, there must inevitably be death,--he is always drowned
therein, just because he is afraid.

24. ‘Some undergo misery for the sake of this world, others meet toil for the sake of heaven;
all living beings, wretched through hope and always missing their aim, fall certainly for
the sake of happiness into misery.

25. ‘It is not the effort itself which I blame,--which flinging aside the base pursues a high
path of its own; but the wise, by all this common toil, ought to attain that state in which
nothing needs ever to be done again.

26. ‘If the mortification of the body here is religion, then the body’s happiness is only irreligion;
but by religion a man obtains happiness in the next world, therefore religion here
bears irreligion as its fruit.

27. ‘Since it is only by the mind’s authority that the body either acts or ceases to act, therefore
to control the thought is alone befitting,--without the thought the body is like a
log.

28. ‘If merit is gained by purity of food, then there is merit also in the deer; and in those
men also who live as outcasts from all enjoyments, through being estranged from them by
the fault of their destiny.

29. ‘If the deliberate choice of pain is a cause of merit, why should not that same choice be
directed to pleasure? If you say that the choice of pleasure carries no authority, is not
the choice of pain equally without authority?

30. ‘So too those who for the sake of purifying their actions, earnestly sprinkle water on themselves,
saying, "this is a sacred spot,"--even there this satisfaction resides only in
the heart,--for waters will not cleanse away sin.

31. ‘The water which has been touched by the virtuous,--that is the spot, if you wish for a
sacred spot on the earth; therefore I count as a place of pilgrimage only the virtues of a
virtuous man’,--water without doubt is only water.’

32. Thus he uttered his discourse full of various arguments, and the sun went down into the
west; then he entered the grove where penances had now ceased and whose trees were gray with
the smoke of the (evening) oblations;

33. Where the sacred fires had been duly transferred when kindled to other spots,--all crowded
with the holy hermits who had performed their ablutions, and with the shrines of the gods
murmuring with the muttered prayers,--it seemed all alive like the full service of religion
in exercise.

34. He spent several nights there, himself like the moon, examining their penances; and he departed
from that penance-field, feeling that he had comprehended the whole nature of penance.

35. The dwellers of the hermitage followed him with their minds fixed on the greatness of soul
visible in his person, as if they were great seers beholding Religion herself, withdrawn
from a land invaded by the base.

36. Then he looked on all those ascetics with their matted hair, bark garments, and rag-strips
waving, and he stood considering their penances under an auspicious and noble tree by the
way-side.

37. Then the hermits having approached stood surrounding the best of men; and an old man from
among them thus addressed him respectfully in a gentle voice:

38. ‘At thy coming the hermitage seems to have become full, it becomes as it were empty when
thou art gone,--therefore, my son, thou wilt not surely desert it, as the loved life the
body of one who wishes to live.

39. ‘In front stands the holy mountain Himavat, inhabited by Brahmarshis, râjarshis, and surarshis;
by whose mere presence the merit of these penances becomes multiplied to the ascetics.

40. ‘Near us also are holy spots of pilgrimage, which become ladders to heaven; loved by divine
sages and saints whose souls are intent on devotion and who keep their souls in perfect
control.

