1. Then having left the weeping tear-faced Chanda,--indifferent to all things in his longing
for the forest, he by whom all objects are accomplished, overpowering the place by his beauty,
entered that hermitage as if it were fully blessed.

2. He the prince with a gait like the lion’s, having entered that arena of deer, himself like
a deer,--by the beauty of his person, even though bereft of his magnificence, attracted
the eyes of all the dwellers in the hermitage.

3. The drivers of wheeled carriages also, with their wives, stood still in curiosity, holding
the yokes in their hands,--they gazed on him who was like Indra, and moved not, standing
like their beasts of burden with their heads half bent down.

4. And the Brâhmans who had gone outside for the sake of fuel, having come with their hands
full of fuel, flowers, and kusa grass,--pre-eminent as they were in penances, and proficients
in wisdom, went to see him, and went not to their cells.

5. Delighted the peacocks uttered their cries, as if they had seen a dark-blue cloud rising
up; and leaving the young grass and coming forward, the deer with restless eyes and the ascetics
who grazed like deer stood still.

6. Beholding him, the lamp of the race of Ikshvâku, shining like the rising sun,--even though
their milking was over, being filled with joy, the oblation-giving cows poured forth their
milk.

7. ‘It is one of the eight Vasus or one of the two Asvins, descended here,’--these words arose,
uttered aloud by the sages in their astonishment at seeing him.

8. Like a second form of the lord of the gods, like the personified glory of the universe, he
lighted up the entire wood like the sun come down of his own accord.

9. Then he, being duly honoured and invited to enter by those dwellers in the hermitage, paid
his homage to the saints, with a voice like a cloud in the rainy season.

10. He, the wise one, longing for liberation, traversed that hermitage filled with the holy
company desirous of heaven,--gazing at their strange penances.

11. He, the gentle one, having seen the different kinds of penance practised by the ascetics
in that sacred grove,--desiring to know the truth, thus addressed one of the ascetics who
was following him:

12. ‘Since this to-day is my first sight of a hermitage I do not understand this rule of penance;
therefore will your honour kindly explain to me what resolve possesses each one of you.’

13. Then the Brâhman well-versed in penance told in order to that bull of the Sâkyas, a very
bull in prowess, all the various kinds of penance and the fruit thereof.

14. ‘Uncultivated food, growing out of the water, leaves, water, and roots and fruits,--this
is the fare of the saints according to the sacred texts; but the different alternatives of
penance vary.

15. ‘Some live like the birds on gleaned corn, others graze on grass like the deer, others live
on air with the snakes, as if turned into ant-hills.

16. ‘Others win their nourishment with great effort from stones, others eat corn ground with
their own teeth; some, having boiled for others, dress for themselves what may chance to
be left.

17. ‘Others, with their tufts of matted hair continually wet with water, twice offer oblations
to Agni with hymns; others plunging like fishes into the water dwell there with their bodies
scratched by tortoises.

18. ‘By such penances endured for a time,--by the higher they attain heaven, by the lower the
world of men; by the path of pain they eventually dwell in happiness,--pain, they say, is
the root of merit.’

19. The king’s son, having heard this speech of the ascetic, even though he saw no lofty truth
in it, was not content, but gently uttered these thoughts to himself:

20. ‘The penance is full of pain and of many kinds, and the fruit of the penance is mainly heaven
at its best, and all the worlds are subject to change; verily the labour of the hermitages
is spent for but little gain.

