61. ‘If he wishes to practise a religious life after abandoning me his lawful wife widowed,--where
is his religion, who wishes to follow penance without his lawful wife to share it with
him?

62. ‘He surely has never heard of the monarchs of olden times, his own ancestors, Mahâsudarsa
and the rest,--how they went with their wives into the forest,--that he thus wishes to follow
a religious life without me.

63. ‘He does not see that husband and wife are both consecrated in sacrifices, and both purified
by the performance of the rites of the Veda, and both destined to enjoy the same results
afterwards,--he therefore grudges me a share in his merit.

64. ‘Surely it must be that this fond lover of religion, knowing that my mind was secretly quarrelling
even with my beloved, lightly and without fear has deserted me thus angry, in the
hope to obtain heavenly nymphs in lndra’s world!

65. ‘But what kind of a thought is this of mine? those women even there have the attributes
which belong to bodies,--for whose sake he thus practises austerities in the forest, deserting
his royal magnificence and my fond devotion.

66. ‘I have no such longing for the joy of heaven, nor is that hard for even common people to
win if they are resolute; but my one desire is how he my beloved may never leave me either
in this world or the next.

67. ‘Even if I am unworthy to look on my husbands face with its long eyes and bright smile,
still is this poor Râhula never to roll about in his father’s lap?

68. ‘Alas! the mind of that wise hero is terribly stern,--gentle as his beauty seems, it is
pitilessly cruel,--who can desert of his own accord such an infant son with his inarticulate
talk, one who would charm even an enemy.

69. ‘My heart too is certainly most stern, yea, made of rock or fashioned even of iron, which
does not break when its lord is gone to the forest, deserted by his royal glory like an
orphan,--he so well worthy of happiness.’

70. So the queen, fainting in her woe, wept and pondered and wailed aloud repeatedly,--self-possessed
as she was by nature, yet in her distress she remembered not her fortitude and felt
no shame.

71. Seeing Yasodharâ thus bewildered with her wild utterances of grief and fallen on the ground,
all the women cried out with their faces streaming with tears like large lotuses beaten
by the rain.

72. But the king, having ended his prayers, and performed the auspicious rites of the sacrifice,
now came out of the temple; and being smitten by the wailing sound of the people, he
tottered like an elephant at the crash of a thunderbolt.

73. Having heard (of the arrival) of both Chandaka and Kanthaka, and having learned the fixed
resolve of his son, the lord of the earth fell struck down by sorrow like the banner of
Indra when the festival is over.

74. Then the king, distracted by his grief for his son, being held up for a moment by his attendants
all of the same race, gazed on the horse with his eyes filled with tears, and then
falling on the ground wailed aloud:

75. ‘After having done many dear exploits for me in battle, one great deed of cruelty, O Kanthaka,
hast thou done,--for by thee that dear son of mine, dear for his every virtue, has
been tossed down in the wood, dear as he was, like a worthless thing.

76. ‘Therefore either lead me to-day where he is, or go quickly and bring him back again; without
him there is no life left to me, as to one plunged in sickness without the true medicine.

77. ‘When Suvarnanishthîvin was carried away by death, it seemed impossible that Srimgaya should
not die; and shall I, when my duty-loving son is gone, fear to set my soul free, like
any coward?

78. ‘How should not the mind of Manu himself be distracted, when parted from his dear virtuous
son,--(Manu) the son of Vivasvat, who knew the higher and the lower, the mighty lord of
creatures, the institutor of the ten chieftains.

79. ‘I envy the monarch, that friend of Indra, the wise son of king Aja, who, when his son went
into the forest, went himself to heaven, and dragged out no miserable life here with vain
tears.

80. ‘Describe to me, O beloved one, the court of that hermitage, whither thou hast carried him
who is as my funeral oblation of water; these my vital airs are all ready to depart, and
are eager for it, longing to drink it.’

