41. ‘From hence, again, the Northern quarter is especially to be fitly followed for the sake
of preeminent merit; even one who was wise starting towards the south could not advance one
single step.

42. ‘Hast thou seen in this sacred grove one who neglects all ceremonies or who follows confused
ceremonies or an outcast or one impure, that thou dost not desire to dwell here? Speak
it out, and let the abode be welcomed.

43. ‘These hermits here desire thee as their companion in penance, thee who art like a storehouse
of penance,--to dwell with thee who art like Indra would bring prosperity even to Vrihaspati.’

44. He, the chief of the wise, when thus addressed in the midst of the ascetics by their chiefÞhaving
resolved in his mind to put an end to all existence--thus uttered his inward thought:

45. ‘The upright-souled saints, the upholders of religion, become the very ideal of our own
kindred through their delight in showing hospitality; by all these kind feelings of thine
towards me affection is produced in me and the path which regards the self as supreme is revealed.

46. ‘I seem to be all at once bathed by these gentle heart-touching words of thine, and the
joy now throbs in me once more which I felt when I first grasped the idea of dharma.

47. ‘There is sorrow to me when I reflect that I shall have to depart, leaving you who are thus
engaged, you who are such a refuge and who have shown such excessive kindness to me,--just
as there was when I had to leave my kindred behind.

48. ‘But this devotion of yours is for the sake of heaven,--while my desire is that there may
be no fresh birth; therefore I wish not to dwell in this wood; the nature of cessation is
different from that of activity.

49. ‘It is not therefore any dislike on my part or the wrong conduct of another, which makes
me go away from this wood; for ye are all like great sages, standing fast in the religious
duties which are in accordance with former ages.

50. Then having heard the prince’s discourse, gracious and of deep meaning, gentle, strong,
and full of dignity, the ascetics paid him especial honour.

51. But a certain Brâhman who was lying there in the ashes, tall and wearing his hair in a tuft,
and clothed in the bark of trees, with reddish eyes and a thin long nose, and carrying
a pot with water in his hand, thus lifted his voice:

52. ‘O sage, brave indeed is thy purpose, who, young as thou art, hast seen the evils of birth;
he who, having pondered thoroughly heaven and liberation, makes up his mind for liberation,--he
is indeed brave!

53. ‘By all those various sacrifices, penances and vows the slaves of passion desire to go to
heaven; but the strong, having battled with passion as with an enemy, desire to obtain liberation.

54. ‘If this is thy settled purpose, go quickly to Viüdhyakoshtha; the Muni Arâḍa lives there
who has gained an insight into absolute bliss.

55. ‘From him thou wilt hear the path to truth, and if thou hast a desire for it, thou wilt
embrace it; but as I foresee, this purpose of thine will go on further, after having rejected
his theory.

56. ‘With the nose of a well-fed horse, large long eyes, a red lower lip, white sharp teeth,
and a thin red tongue,--this face of thine will drink up the entire ocean of what is to be
known.

57. ‘That unfathomed depth which characterises thee, that majesty and all those signs of thine,--they
shall win a teacher’s chair in the earth which was never won by sages even in a
former age.’

58. The prince replied, ‘Very well,’ and having saluted the company of sages he departed; the
hermits also having duly performed to him all the rites of courtesy entered again into the
ascetic grove.

Book VIII [Lamentations in the Palace]

