1. Meanwhile the attendant of the horse, in deep distress, when his unselfish master thus went
into the forest, made every effort in the road to dissolve his load of sorrow, and yet
in spite of it all not a tear dropped from him.

2. But the road which by his lord’s command he had traversed in one night with that horse,--that
same road he now travelled in eight days, pondering his lord’s absence.

3. And the horse Kanthaka, though he still went on bravely, flagged and had lost all spirit
in his heart; and decked though he was with ornaments, he had lost all his beauty when bereft
of his master.

4. And turning round towards that ascetic-grove, he neighed repeatedly with a mournful sound;
and though pressed with hunger, he welcomed not nor tasted any grass or water on the road,
as before.

5. Slowly they two at last came back to the city called after Kapila, which seemed empty when
deserted by that hero who was bent on the salvation of the world,--like the sky bereft of
the sun.

6. Bright as it was with lotus-covered waters, adorned also with trees full of flowers, that
garden of his, which was now like a forest, was no longer gay with citizens who had lost
all their gladness.

7. Then those two,--who were as it were silently forbidden by the sad inhabitants who were wandering
in that direction, their brightness gone and their eyes dim with tears,--slowly entered
the city which seemed all bathed in gloom.

8. Having heard that they had returned with their limbs all relaxed, coming back without the
pride of the Sâkya race, the men of the city shed tears in the road, as when in old days
the chariot of the son of Dasaratha came back.

9. Full of wrath, the people followed Chandaka in the road, crying behind him with tears, ‘Where
is the king’s son, the glory of his race and kingdom? he has been stolen away by thee.’

10. Then he said to those faithful ones, I have not left the king’s son; but by him in the uninhabited
forest I weeping and the dress of a householder were abandoned together.’

11. Having heard these words of his those crowds adopted a most difficult resolve; they did
not wipe away the tears which fell from their eyes, and they blamed their own (evil) hearts
on account of the consequences of their actions;

12. Then they said, ‘Let us go this very day into that forest, whither he is gone, whose gait
is like the king of elephants; without him we have no wish to live, like the senses when
the souls depart.

13. ‘This city bereft of him is a forest, and that forest which possesses him is a city; the
city without him has no charms for us, like heaven without the lord of the Maruts, when Vritra
was slain.’

14. Next the women crowded to the rows of windows, crying to one another, ‘The prince has returned;’
but having heard that his horse had an empty back, they closed the windows again
and wailed aloud.

15. But the king, having undertaken religious observances for the recovery of his son, with
his mind distressed by the vow and the sorrow, was muttering prayers in the temple, and performing
such rites as suited the occasion.

16. Then with his eyes filled with tears,--taking the horse, his whole soul fixed on the horse,--overcome
with grief he entered the palace as if his master had been killed by an enemy.

17. And entering the royal stable, looking about with his eyes full of tears, Kanthaka uttered
a loud sound, as if he were uttering his woe to the people.

18. Then the birds that fed in the middle of the house, and the carefully cherished horses that
were tied near by, re-echoed the sound of that horse, thinking that it might be the return
of the prince.

19. And the people, deceived by an excessive joy, who were in the neighbourhood of the king’s
inner apartments, thought in their hearts, ‘Since the horse Kanthaka neighs, it must be
that the prince is coming.’

20. Then the women, who were fainting with sorrow, now in wild joy, with their eyes rolling
to see the prince, rushed out of the palace full of hope, like flickering lightnings from
an autumn cloud.

