41. ‘If he had neighed and so woke up the people, or had even made a noise with his hoofs on
the ground, or had made the loudest sound he could with his jaws, my grief would not have
been so great.’

42. Having thus heard the queen’s words, their syllables choked with tears and full of lament,
slowly Chandaka uttered this answer, with his face bent down, his voice low with tears,
and his hands clasped in supplication:

43. ‘Surely, O queen, thou wilt not blame Kanthaka nor wilt thou show thy anger against me,
know that we two are entirely guiltless,--that god amongst men, O queen, is gone away like
a god.

44. ‘I indeed, though I well knew the king’s command, as though dragged by force by some divine
powers, brought quickly to him this swift steed, and followed him on the road unwearied.

45. ‘And this best of horses as he went along touched not the ground with the tips of his hoofs
as if they were kept aloft from it; and so too, having his mouth restrained as by fate,
he made no sound with his jaws and neighed not.

46. ‘When the prince went out, then the gate was thrown open of its own accord; and the darkness
of the night was, as it were, pierced by the sun,--we may learn from hence too that this
was the ordering of fate.

47. ‘When also by the king’s command, in palace and city, diligent guards had been placed by
thousands, and at that time they were all overcome by sleep and woke not,--we may learn from
hence too that this was the ordering of fate.

48. ‘When also the garment, approved for a hermit’s dwelling in the forest, was offered to him
at the moment by some denizen of heaven, and the tiara which he threw into the sky was
carried off,--we may learn from hence too that this was the ordering of fate.

49. ‘Do not therefore assume that his departure arises from the fault of either of us, O queen;
neither I nor this horse acted by our own choice; he went on his way with the gods as
his retinue.’

50. Having thus heard the history of the prince’s departure, so marvellous in many ways, those
women, as though losing their grief, were filled with wonder, but they again took up their
distress at the thought of his becoming an ascetic.

51. With her eyes filled with the tears of despondency, wretched like an osprey who has lost
her young,--Gautamî abandoning all self-control wailed aloud,--she fainted, and with a weeping
face exclaimed:

52. ‘Beautiful, soft, black, and all in great waves, growing each from its own special root,--those
hairs of his are tossed on the ground, worthy to be encircled by a royal diadem.

53. ‘With his long arms and lion-gait, his bull-like eye, and his beauty bright like gold, his
broad chest, and his voice deep as a drum or a cloud, should such a hero as this dwell
in a hermitage?

54. ‘This earth is indeed unworthy as regards that peerless doer of noble actions, for such
a virtuous hero has gone away from her,--it is the merits and virtues of the subjects which
produce their king.

55. ‘Those two feet of his, tender, with their beautiful web spread between the toes, with their
ankles concealed, and soft like a blue lotus,--how can they, bearing a wheel marked in
the middle, walk on the hard ground of the skirts of the forest?

56. ‘That body, which deserves to sit or lie on the roof of a palace,--honoured with costly
garments, aloes, and sandal-wood,--how will that manly body live in the woods, exposed to
the attacks of the cold, the heat, and the rain?

57. ‘He who was proud of his family, goodness, strength, energy, sacred learning, beauty, and
youth,--who was ever ready to give, not to ask,--how will he go about begging alms from
others?

58. ‘He who, lying on a spotless golden bed, was awakened during the night by the concert of
musical instruments,--how alas! will he, my ascetic, sleep to-day on the bare ground with
only one rag of cloth interposed?’

59. Having heard this piteous lamentation, the women, embracing one another with their arms,
rained the tears from their eyes, as the shaken creepers drop honey from their flowers.

60. Then Yasodharâ fell upon the ground, like the ruddy goose parted from her mate, and in utter
bewilderment she slowly lamented, with her voice repeatedly stopped by sobs:

