1. The prince, he of the broad and lusty chest, having thus dismissed the minister and the priest,
crossed the Ganges with its speeding waves and went to Râjagriha with its beautiful
palaces.

2. He reached the city distinguished by the five hills, well guarded and adorned with mountains,
and supported and hallowed by auspicious sacred places,--like Brahman in a holy calm
going to the uppermost heaven.

3. Having heard of his majesty and strength, and his splendid beauty, surpassing all other men,
the people of that region were all astonished as at him who has a bull for his sign and
is immovable in his vow.

4. On seeing him, he who was going elsewhere stood still, and he who was standing there followed
him in the way; he who was walking gently and gravely ran quickly, and he who was sitting
at once sprang up.

5. Some people reverenced him with their hands, others in worship saluted him with their heads,
some addressed him with affectionate words,--not one went on without paying him homage.

6. Those who were wearing gay-coloured dresses were ashamed when they saw him, those who were
talking on random subjects fell to silence on the road; no one indulged in an improper thought,
as at the presence of Religion herself embodied.

7. In the men and the women on the highway, even though they were intent on other business,
that conduct alone with the profoundest reverence seemed proper which is enjoined by the rules
of royal homage; but his eyes never looked upon them.

8. His brows, his forehead, his mouth, or his eyes,--his body, his hands, his feet, or his gait,--whatever
part of him any one beheld, that at once riveted his eyes.

9. Having beheld him with the beautiful circle of hair between his brows and with long eyes,
with his radiant body and his hands showing a graceful membrane between the fingers,--so
worthy of ruling the earth and yet wearing a mendicant’s dress,--the Goddess of Râjagriha
was herself perturbed.

10. Then Srenya, the lord of the court of the Magadhas, beheld from the outside of his palace
the immense concourse of people, and asked the reason of it; and thus did a man recount
it to him:

11. ‘He who was thus foretold by the Brâhmans, "he will either attain supreme wisdom or the
empire of the earth,"--it is he, the son of the king of the Sâkyas, who is the ascetic whom
the people are gazing at.’

12. The king, having heard this and perceived its meaning with his mind, thus at once spoke
to that man: ‘Let it be known whither he is going;’ and the man, receiving the command, followed
the prince.

13. With unrestless eyes, seeing only a yoke’s length before him, with his voice hushed, and
his walk slow and measured, he, the noblest of mendicants, went begging alms, keeping his
limbs and his wandering thoughts under control.

14. Having received such alms as were offered, he retired to a lonely cascade of the mountain;
and having eaten it there in the fitting manner, he ascended the mountain Pânḍava.

15. In that wood, thickly filled with lodhra trees, having its thickets resonant with the notes
of the peacocks, he the sun of mankind shone, wearing his red dress, like the morning
sun above the eastern mountain.

16. That royal attendant, having thus watched him there, related it all to the king Srenya;
and the king, when he heard it, in his deep veneration, started himself to go thither with
a modest retinue.

17. He who was like the Pânḍavas in heroism, and like a mountain in stature, ascended Pânḍava,
that noblest of mountains,--a crown-wearer, of lion-like gait, a lion among men, as a maned
lion ascends a mountain.

18. There he beheld the Bodhisattva, resplendent as he sat on his hams, with subdued senses,
as if the mountain were moving, and he himself were a peak thereof,--like the moon rising
from the top of a cloud.

19. Him, distinguished by his beauty of form and perfect tranquillity as the very creation of
Religion herself,--filled with astonishment and affectionate regard the king of men approached,
as Indra the self-existent (Brahman).

20. He, the chief of the courteous, having courteously drawn nigh to him, inquired as to the
equilibrium of his bodily humours; and the other with equal gentleness assured the king of
his health of mind and freedom from all ailments.

