21. Then the king sat down on the clean surface of the rock, dark blue like an elephant’s ear;
and being seated, with the other’s assent, he thus spoke, desiring to know his state of
mind:

22. ‘I have a strong friendship with thy family, come down by inheritance and well proved; since
from this a desire to speak to thee, my son, has arisen in me, therefore listen to my
words of affection.

23. ‘When I consider thy widespread race, beginning with the sun, thy fresh youth, and thy conspicuous
beauty,--whence comes this resolve of thine so out of all harmony with the rest,
set wholly on a mendicant’s life, not on a kingdom?

24. ‘Thy limbs are worthy of red sandal-wood perfumes,--they do not deserve the rough contact
of red cloth; this hand is fit to protect subjects, it deserves not to hold food given by
another.

25. ‘If therefore, gentle youth, through thy love for thy father thou desirest not thy paternal
kingdom in thy generosity,--then at any rate thy choice must not be excused,--accepting
forthwith one half of my kingdom.

26. ‘If thou actest thus there will be no violence shown to thine own people, and by the mere
lapse of time imperial power at last flies for refuge to the tranquil mind; therefore be
pleased to do me a kindness,--the prosperity of the good becomes very powerful, when aided
by the good.

27. ‘But if from thy pride of race thou dost not now feel confidence in me, then plunge with
thy arrows into countless armies, and with me as thy ally seek to conquer thy foes.

28. ‘Choose thou therefore one of these ends, pursue according to rule religious merit, wealth,
and pleasure; for these, love and the rest, in reverse order, are the three objects in
life; when men die they pass into dissolution as far as regards this world.

29. ‘That which is pleasure when it has overpowered wealth and merit, is wealth when it has
conquered merit and pleasure; so too it is merit, when pleasure and wealth fall into abeyance;
but all would have to be alike abandoned, if thy desired end were obtained.

30. ‘Do thou therefore by pursuing the three objects of life, cause this beauty of thine to
bear its fruit; they say that when the attainment of religion, wealth, and pleasure is complete
in all its parts, then the end of man is complete.

31. ‘Do not thou let these two brawny arms lie useless which are worthy to draw the bow; they
are well fitted like Mândhâtri’s to conquer the three worlds, much more the earth.

32. ‘I speak this to you out of affection,--not through love of dominion or through astonishment;
beholding this mendicant-dress of thine, I am filled with compassion and I shed tears.

33. ‘O thou who desirest the mendicant’s stage of life enjoy pleasures now; in due time, O thou
lover of religion, thou shalt practise religion;--ere old age comes on and overcomes this
thy beauty, well worthy of thy illustrious race.

34. ‘The old man can obtain merit by religion; old age is helpless for the enjoyment of pleasures;
therefore they say that pleasures belong to the young man, wealth to the middle-aged,
and religion to the old.

35. ‘Youth in this present world is the enemy of religion and wealth,--since pleasures, however
we guard them, are hard to hold, therefore, wherever pleasures are to be found, there
they seize them.

36. ‘Old age is prone to reflection’, it is grave and intent on remaining quiet; it attains
unimpassionedness with but little effort, unavoidably, and for very shame.

37. ‘Therefore having passed through the deceptive period of youth, fickle, intent on external
objects, heedless, impatient, not looking at the distance,--they take breath like men who
have escaped safe through a forest.

38. ‘Let therefore this fickle time of youth first pass by, reckless and giddy,--our early years
are the mark for pleasure, they cannot be kept from the power of the senses.

39. Or if religion is really thy one aim, then offer sacrifices,--this is thy family’s immemorial
custom,--climbing to highest heaven by sacrifices, even Indra, the lord of the winds,
went thus to highest heaven.

40. ‘With their arms pressed by golden bracelets, and their variegated diadems resplendent with
the light of gems, royal sages have reached the same goal by sacrifices which great sages
reached by self-mortification.’

