21. ‘Success in pleasure is to be considered a misery in the man of pleasure, for he becomes
intoxicated when his desired pleasures are attained; through intoxication he does what should
not be done, not what should be done; and being wounded thereby he falls into a miserable
end.

22. ‘These pleasures which are gained and kept by toil,--which after deceiving leave you and
return whence they came,--these pleasures which are but borrowed for a time, what man of
self-control, if he is wise, would delight in them?

23. ‘What man of self-control could find satisfaction in these pleasures which are like a torch
of hay,--which excite thirst when you seek them and when you grasp them, and which they
who abandon not keep only as misery?

24. ‘Those men of no self-control who are bitten by them in their hearts, fall into ruin and
attain not bliss,--what man of self-control could find satisfaction in these pleasures, which
are like an angry, cruel serpent?

25. ‘Even if they enjoy them men are not satisfied, like dogs famishing with hunger over a bone,--what
man of self-control could find satisfaction in these pleasures, which are like
a skeleton composed of dry bones?

26. ‘What man of self-control could find satisfaction in these pleasures which are like flesh
that has been flung away, and which produce misery by their being held only in common with
kings, thieves, water, and fire?

27. ‘What man of self-control could find satisfaction in these pleasures, which, like the senses,
are destructive, and which bring calamity on every hand to those who abide in them,
from the side of friends even more than from open enemies?

28. ‘What man of self-control could find satisfaction in those pleasures, which are like the
fruit that grows on the top of a tree,--which those who would leap up to reach fall down
upon a mountain or into a forest, waters, or the ocean?

29. ‘What man of self-control could find satisfaction in those pleasures, which are like snatching
up a hot coal,--men never attain happiness, however they pursue them, increase them,
or guard them?130. ‘What man of self-control could find satisfaction in those pleasures,
which are like the enjoyments in a dream,--which are gained by their recipients after manifold
pilgrimages and labours, and then perish in a moment?

2

31. ‘What man of self-control could find satisfaction in those pleasures which are like a spear,
sword, or club,--for the sake of which the Kurus, the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, the
Maithilas and the Danḍakas suffered destruction?

32. ‘What man of self-control could find satisfaction in those pleasures which dissolve friendships
and for the sake of which the two Asuras Sunda and Upasunda perished, victims engaged
in mutual enmity?

33. ‘None, however their intellect is blinded with pleasure, give themselves up, as in compassion,
to ravenous beasts; so what man of self-control could find satisfaction in those pleasures
which are disastrous and constant enemies?

34. ‘He whose intellect is blinded with pleasure does pitiable things; he incurs calamities,
such as death, bonds, and the like; the wretch, who is the miserable slave of hope for the
sake of pleasure, well deserves the pain of death even in the world of the living.

35. ‘Deer are lured to their destruction by songs, insects for the sake of the brightness fly
into the fire, the fish greedy for the flesh swallows the iron hook,--therefore worldly
objects produce misery as their end.

36. ‘As for the common opinion, "pleasures are enjoyments," none of them when examined are worthy
of being enjoyed; fine garments and the rest are only the accessories of things,--they
are to be regarded as merely the remedies for pain.

37. ‘Water is desired for allaying thirst; food in the same way for removing hunger; a house
for keeping off the wind, the heat of the sun, and the rain; and dress for keeping off the
cold and to cover one’s nakedness.

38. ‘So too a bed is for removing drowsiness; a carriage for remedying the fatigue of a journey;
a seat for alleviating the pain of standing; so bathing as a means for washing, health,
and strength.

39. ‘External objects therefore are to human beings means for remedying pain, not in themselves
sources of enjoyment; what wise man would allow that he enjoys those delights which are
only used as remedial?

40. ‘He who, when burned with the heat of bilious fever, maintains that cold appliances are
an enjoyment, when he is only engaged in alleviating pain,--he indeed might give the name
of enjoyment to pleasures.

