41. ‘Since variableness is found in all pleasures, I cannot apply to them the name of enjoyment;
the very conditions which mark pleasure, bring also in its turn pain.

42. ‘Heavy garments and fragrant aloe-wood are pleasant in the cold, but an annoyance in the
heat; and the moonbeams and sandal-wood are pleasant in the heat, but a pain in the cold.

43. ‘Since the well-known opposite pairs, such as gain and loss and the rest, are inseparably
connected with everything in this world,--therefore no man is invariably happy on the earth
nor invariably wretched.

44. ‘When I see how the nature of pleasure and pain are mixed, I consider royalty and slavery
as the same; a king does not always smile, nor is a slave always in pain.

45. ‘Since to be a king involves a wider range of command, therefore the pains of a king are
great; for a king is like a peg,--he endures trouble for the sake of the world.

46. ‘A king is unfortunate, if he places his trust in his royalty which is apt to desert and
loves crooked turns; and on the other hand, if he does not trust in it, then what can be
the happiness of a timid king?

47. ‘And since after even conquering the whole earth, one city only can serve as a dwelling-place,
and even there only one house can be inhabited, is not royalty mere labour for others?

48. ‘And even in royal clothing one pair of garments is all he needs, and just enough food to
keep off hunger; so only one bed, and only one seat; all a king’s other distinctions are
only for pride.

49. ‘And if all these fruits are desired for the sake of satisfaction, I can be satisfied without
a kingdom; and if a man is once satisfied in this world, are not all distinctions indistinguishable?

50. ‘He then who has attained the auspicious road to happiness is not to be deceived in regard
to pleasures; remembering thy professed friendship, tell me again and again, do they keep
their promise?

51. ‘I have not repaired to the forest through anger, nor because my diadem has been dashed
down by an enemy’s arrows; nor have I set my desires on loftier objects, that I thus refuse
thy proposal.

52. ‘Only he who, having once let go a malignant incensed serpent, or a blazing hay-torch all
on fire, would strive again to seize it, would ever seek pleasures again after having once
abandoned them.

53. ‘Only he who, though seeing, would envy the blind, though free the bound, though wealthy
the destitute, though sound in his reason the maniac,--only he, I say, would envy one who
is devoted to worldly objects.

54. ‘He who lives on alms, my good friend, is not to be pitied, having gained his end and being
set on escaping the fear of old age and death; he has here the best happiness, perfect
calm, and hereafter all pains are for him abolished.

55. ‘But he is to be pitied who is overpowered by thirst though set in the midst of great wealth,--who
attains not the happiness of calm here, while pain has to be experienced hereafter.

56. ‘Thus to speak to me is well worthy of thy character, thy mode of life, and thy family;
and to carry out my resolve is also befitting my character, my mode of life, and my family.

57. ‘I have been wounded by the enjoyment of the world, and I have come out longing to obtain
peace; I would not accept an empire free from all ill even in the third heaven, how much
less amongst men?

58. ‘But as for what thou saidst to me, O king, that the universal pursuit of the three objects
is the supreme end of man,--and thou saidst that what I regard as the desirable is misery,--thy
three objects are perishable and also unsatisfying.

59. ‘But that world in which there is no old age nor fear, no birth, nor death, nor anxieties,
that alone I consider the highest end of man, where there is no ever-renewed action.

60. ‘And as for what thou saidst "wait till old age comes, for youth is ever subject to change;"--this
want of decision is itself uncertain; for age too can be irresolute and youth can
be firm.

