61. ‘But since Fate is so well skilled in its art as to draw the world in all its various ages
into its power,--how shall the wise man, who desires tranquillity, wait for old age, when
he knows not when the time of death will be?

62. ‘When death stands ready like a hunter, with old age as his weapon, and diseases scattered
about as his arrows, smiting down living creatures who fly like deer to the forest of destiny,
what desire can there be in any one for length of life?

63. ‘It well befits the youthful son or the old man or the child so to act with all promptitude
that they may choose the action of the religious man whose soul is all mercy,--nay, better
still, his inactivity.

64. ‘And as for what thou saidst, "be diligent in sacrifices for religion, such as are worthy
of thy race and bring a glorious fruit,"--honour to such sacrifices! I desire not that fruit
which is sought by causing pain to others!

65. ‘To kill a helpless victim through a wish for future reward,--it would be an unseemly action
for a merciful-hearted good man, even if the reward of the sacrifice were eternal; but
what if, after all, it is subject to decay?

66. ‘And even if true religion did not consist in quite another rule of conduct, by self-restraint,
moral practice and a total absence of passion,--still it would not be seemly to follow
the rule of sacrifice, where the highest reward is described as attained only by slaughter.

67. ‘Even that happiness which comes to a man, while he stays in this world, through the injury
of another, is hateful to the wise compassionate heart; how much more if it be something
beyond our sight in another life?

68. ‘I am not to be lured into a course of action for future reward,--my mind does not delight,
O king, in future births; these actions are uncertain and wavering in their direction,
like plants beaten by the rain from a cloud.

69. ‘I have come here with a wish to see next the seer Arâḍa who proclaims liberation; I start
this very day,--happiness be to thee, O king; forgive my words which may seem harsh through
their absolute freedom from passion.

70. ‘Now therefore do thou guard (the world) like Indra in heaven; guard it continually like
the sun by thy excellencies; guard its best happiness here; guard the earth; guard life by
the noble; guard the sons of the good; guard thy royal powers, O king; and guard thine own
religion.

71. ‘As in the midst of a sudden catastrophe arising from the flame of (fire), the enemy of
cold, a bird, to deliver its body, betakes itself to the enemy of fire (water),--so do thou,
when occasion calls, betake thyself, to deliver thy mind, to those who will destroy the
enemies of thy home.’

72. The king himself, folding his hands, with a sudden longing come upon him, replied, ‘Thou
art obtaining thy desire without hindrance; when thou hast at last accomplished all that
thou hast to do, thou shalt show hereafter thy favour towards me.’

73. Having given his firm promise to the monarch, he proceeded to the Vaisvantara hermitage;
and, after watching him with astonishment, as he wandered on in his course, the king and
his courtiers returned to the mountain (of Râjagiri).

Book XII [Visit to Arâḍa]

