1. Being thus addressed by the monarch of the Magadhas, in a hostile speech with a friendly
face, self-possessed, unchanged, pure by family and personal purity, the son of Suddhodana
thus made answer:

2. ‘This is not to be called a strange thing for thee, born as thou art in the great family
whose ensign is the lion--that by thee of pure conduct, O lover of thy friends, this line
of conduct should be adopted towards him who stands as one of thy friends.

3. ‘Amongst the bad a friendship, worthy of their family, ceases to continue (and fades) like
prosperity among the faint-hearted; it is only the good who keep increasing the old friendship
of their ancestors by a new succession of friendly acts.

4. ‘But those men who act unchangingly towards their friends in reverses of fortune, I esteem
in my heart as true friends; who is not the friend of the prosperous man in his times of
abundance?

5. ‘So those who, having obtained riches in the world, employ them for the sake of their friends
and religion,--their wealth has real solidity, and when it perishes it produces no pain
at the end.

6. ‘This thy determination concerning me, O king, is prompted by pure generosity and friendship;
I will meet thee courteously with simple friendship; I would not utter aught else in
my reply.

7. ‘I, having experienced the fear of old age and death, fly to this path of religion in my
desire for liberation; leaving behind my dear kindred with tears in their faces,--still more
then those pleasures which are the causes of evil.

8. ‘I am not so afraid even of serpents nor of thunderbolts falling from heaven, nor of flames
blown together by the wind, as I am afraid of these worldly objects.

9. ‘These transient pleasures,--the robbers of our happiness and our wealth, and which float
empty and like illusions through the world,--infatuate men’s minds even when they are only
hoped for,--still more when they take up their abode in the soul.

10. ‘The victims of pleasure attain not to happiness even in the heaven of the gods, still less
in the world of mortals; he who is athirst is never satisfied with pleasures, as the fire,
the friend of the wind, with fuel.

11. ‘There is no calamity in the world like pleasures,--people are devoted to them through delusion;
when he once knows the truth and so fears evil, what wise man would of his own choice
desire evil?

12. ‘When they have obtained all the earth girdled by the sea, kings wish to conquer the other
side of the great ocean: mankind are never satiated with pleasures, as the ocean with the
waters that fall into it.

13. ‘When it had rained a golden shower from heaven, and when he had conquered the continents
and the four oceans, and had even obtained the half of Sakra’s throne, Mândhâtri was still
unsatisfied with worldly objects.

14. ‘Though he had enjoyed the kingdom of the gods in heaven, when Indra had concealed himself
through fear of Vritra, and though in his pride he had made the great sishis bear his litter,
Nahusha fell, unsatisfied with pleasures.

15. ‘King (Purûravas) the son of Iḍâ, having penetrated into the furthest heaven, and brought
the goddess Urvasî into his power,--when he wished in his greed to take away gold from the
ṛshis--being unsatisfied with pleasures, fell into destruction.

16. ‘Who would put his trust in these worldly objects, whether in heaven or in earth, unsettled
as to lot or family,--which passed from Bali to Indra, and from Indra to Nahusha, and
then again from Nahusha back to Indra?

17. ‘Who would seek these enemies bearing the name of pleasures, by whom even those sages have
been overcome, who were devoted to other pursuits, whose only clothes were rags, whose
food was roots, fruits, and water, and who wore their twisted locks as long as snakes?

18. ‘Those pleasures for whose sake even Ugrâyudha, armed terribly as he was with his weapon,
found death at Bhishma’s hands,--is not the mere thought of them unlucky and fatal,--still
more the thought of the irreligious whose lives are spent in their service?

19. ‘Who that considers the paltry flavour of worldly objects,--the very height of union being
only insatiety,--the blame of the virtuous, and the certain sin,--has ever drawn near this
poison which is called pleasure?

20. ‘When they hear of the miseries of those who are intent on pleasure and are devoted to worldly
pursuits, such as agriculture and the rest, and the self-content of those who are careless
of pleasure,--it well befits the self-controlled to fling it away.

