61. ‘First he makes use of all the apertures of his body; and next he exerts his will to experience
a feeling of void space even in the solid parts.

62. ‘But another wise man, having contracted his soul which is by nature extended everywhere
like the ether,--as he gazes ever further on, detects a yet higher distinction.

63. ‘Another one of those who are profoundly versed in the supreme Self, having abolished himself
by himself, sees that nothing exists and is called a Nihilist.

64. ‘Then like the Muÿja-reed’s stalk from its sheath or the bird from its cage, the soul, escaped
from the body, is declared to be "liberated."

65. ‘This is that supreme Brahman, constant, eternal, and without distinctive signs; which the
wise who know reality declare to be liberation.

66. ‘Thus have I shown to thee the means and liberation; if thou hast understood and approved
it, then act accordingly.

67. ‘Jaigîshavya and Ganaka, and the aged Parâsara, by following this path, were liberated,
and so were others who sought liberation.’

68. The prince having not accepted his words but having pondered them, filled with the force
of his former arguments, thus made answer:

69. ‘I have heard this thy doctrine, subtil and pre-eminently auspicious, but I hold that it
cannot be final, because it does not teach us how to abandon this soul itself in the various
bodies.

70. ‘For I consider that the embodied soul, though freed from the evolutes and the evolvents,
is still subject to the condition of birth and has the condition of a seed.

71. ‘Even though the pure soul is declared to be "liberated," ... [... it will again become
bound from the continued existence of the causal conditions.]1

[72. Just as a seed does not grow for want of the proper season, soil or water, but does grow
when these causal conditions are present, such I deem to be teh case of the soul.]2

[73. Ad as for the statement that liberation is deemed to come by severance fromt he power of
the act, from ignorance and from desire ...]3 ...yet as long as the soul remains there can
be no absolute abandonment of it.

72. ‘If we abandon successively all this triad, yet "distinction" is still perceived; as long
as the soul itself continues, there this triad continues in a subtil form.

73. ‘It is held (by some) that this is liberation, because the "imperfections" are so attenuated,
and the thinking power is inactive, and the term of existence is so prolonged;

74. ‘But as for this supposed abandonment of the principle of egoism,--as long as the soul continues,
there is no real abandonment of egoism.

75. ‘The soul does not become free from qualities as long as it is not released from number
and the rest; therefore, as long as there is no freedom from qualities, there is no liberation
declared for it.

76. ‘There is no real separation of the qualities and their subject; for fire cannot be conceived,
apart from its form and heat.

77. ‘Before the body there will be nothing embodied, so before the qualities there will be no
subject; how, if it was originally free, could the soul ever become bound?

78. ‘The body-knower (the soul) which is unembodied, must be either knowing or unknowing; if
it is knowing, there must be some object to be known, and if there is this object, it is
not liberated.

