1. When the great sage, sprung from a line of royal sages, sat down there with his soul fully
resolved to obtain the highest knowledge, the whole world rejoiced; but Mâra, the enemy
of the good law, was afraid.

2. He whom they call in the world Kâmadeva, the owner of the various weapons, the flower-arrowed,
the lord of the course of desire,--it is he whom they also style Mâra the enemy of liberation.

3. His three sons, Confusion, Gaiety, and Pride, and his three daughters, Lust, Delight, and
Thirst, asked of him the reason of his despondency, and he thus made answer unto them:

4. ‘This sage, wearing the armour of resolution, and having drawn the arrow of wisdom with the
barb of truth, sits yonder intending to conquer my realms,--hence is this despondency of
my mind.

5. ‘If he succeeds in overcoming me and proclaims to the world the path of final bliss, all
this my realm will to-day become empty, as did that of the disembodied lord when he violated
the rules of his station.

6. ‘While, therefore, he stands within my reach and while his spiritual eyesight is not yet
attained, I will assail him to break his vow as the swollen might of a river assails a dam.’

7. Then having seized his flower-made bow and his five infatuating arrows, he drew near to the
root of the Asvattha tree with his children, he the great disturber of the minds of living
beings.

8. Having fixed his left hand on the end of the barb and playing with the arrow, Mâra thus addressed
the calm seer as he sat on his seat, preparing to cross to the further side of the
ocean of existence:

9. ‘Up, up, O thou Kshatriya, afraid of death! follow thine own duty and abandon this law of
liberation! and having conquered the lower worlds by thy arrows [and sacrifices], proceed
to gain the higher worlds of Indra.

10. ‘That is a glorious path to travel, which has been followed by former leaders of men; this
mendicant life is ill-suited for one born in the noble family of a royal sage to follow.

11. ‘But if thou wilt not rise, strong in thy purpose,--then be firm if thou wilt and quit not
thy resolve,--this arrow is uplifted by me,--it is the very one which was shot against
Sûryaka, the enemy of the fish.

12. ‘So too, I think, when somewhat probed by this weapon, even the son of Iḍâ, the grandson
of the moon, became mad; and Sântanu also lost his self-control,--how much more then one
of feebler powers now that the age has grown degenerate?

13. ‘Therefore quickly rise up and come to thyself - for this arrow is ready, darting out its
tongue, which I do not launch even against the cakravâka birds, tenderly attached as they
are and well deserving the name of lovers.’

14. But when, even though thus addressed, the Sâkya saint unheeding did not change his posture,
then Mâra discharged his arrow at him, setting in front of him his daughters and his sons.

15. But even when that arrow was shot he gave no heed and swerved not from his firmness; and
Mâra, beholding him thus, sank down, and slowly thus spoke, full of thought:

16. ‘He does not even notice that arrow by which the god Sambhu was pierced with love for the
daughter of the mountain and shaken in his vow; can he be destitute of all feeling? is not
this that very arrow?

17. ‘He is not worthy of my flower-shaft, nor my arrow "gladdener," nor the sending of my daughter
Rati (to tempt him); he deserves the alarms and rebukes and blows from all the gathered
hosts of the demons.’

18. Then Mâra called to mind his own army, wishing to work the overthrow of the Sâkya saint;
and his followers swarmed round, wearing different forms and carrying arrows, trees, darts,
clubs, and swords in their hands;

19. Having the faces of boars, fishes, horses, asses, and camels, of tigers, bears, lions, and
elephants,--one-eyed, many-faced, three-headed,--with protuberant bellies and speckled
bellies;

20. Blended with goats, with knees swollen like pots, armed with tusks and with claws, carrying
headless trunks in their hands, and assuming many forms, with half-mutilated faces, and
with monstrous mouths;

