21. Copper-red, covered with red spots, bearing clubs in their hands, with yellow or smoke-coloured
hair, with wreaths dangling down, with long pendulous ears like elephants, clothed
in leather or wearing no clothes at all;

22. Having half their faces white or half their bodies green,--red and smoke-coloured, yellow
and black,--with arms reaching out longer than a serpent, and with girdles jingling with
rattling bells.

23. Some were as tall as palm-trees, carrying spears,--others were of the size of children with
projecting teeth, others birds with the faces of rams, others with men’s bodies and cats’
faces;

24. With dishevelled hair, or with topknots, or half-bald, with rope-garments or with head-dress
all in confusion,--with triumphant faces or frowning faces,--wasting the strength or
fascinating the mind.

25. Some as they went leaped about wildly, others danced upon one another, some sported about
in the sky, others went along on the tops of the trees.

26. One danced, shaking a trident, another made a crash, dragging a club, another bounded for
joy like a bull, another blazed out flames from every hair.

27. Such were the troops of demons who encircled the root of the Bodhi tree on every side, eager
to seize it and to destroy it, awaiting the command of their lord.

28. Beholding in the first half of the night that battle of Mâra and the bull of the Sâkya race,
the heavens did not shine and the earth shook and the (ten) regions of space flashed
flame and roared.

29. A wind of intense violence blew in all directions, the stars did not shine, the moon gave
no light, and a deeper darkness of night spread around, and all the oceans were agitated.

30. The mountain deities and the Nâgas who honoured the Law, indignant at the attack on the
saint, rolling their eyes in anger against Mâra, heaved deep sighs and opened their mouths
wide.

31. But the god-sages, the Suddhâdhivâsas, being as it were absorbed in the perfect accomplishment
of the good Law, felt only a pity for Mâra in their minds and through their absolute
passionlessness were unruffled by anger.

32. When they saw the foot of the Bodhi tree crowded with that host of Mâra, intent on doing
harm,--the sky was filled with the cry raised by all the virtuous beings who desired the
world’s liberation.

33. But the great sage having beheld that army of Mâra thus engaged in an attack on the knower
of the Law, remained untroubled and suffered no perturbation, like a lion seated in the
midst of oxen.

34. Then Mâra commanded his excited army of demons to terrify him; and forthwith that host resolved
to break down his determination with their various powers.

35. Some with many tongues hanging out and shaking, with sharp-pointed savage teeth and eyes
like the disk of the sun, with wide-yawning mouths and upright ears like spikes,--they stood
round trying to frighten him.

36. Before these monsters standing there, so dreadful in form and disposition, the great sage
remained unalarmed and untroubled, sporting with them as if they had been only rude children.

37. Then one of them, with his eyes rolling wildly, lifted up a club against him; but his arm
with the club was instantly paralysed, as was Indra’s of old with its thunderbolt.

38. Some, having lifted up stones and trees, found themselves unable to throw them against the
sage; down they fell, with their trees and their stones, like the roots of the Vindhya
shattered by the thunderbolt.

39. Others, leaping up into the sky, flung rocks, trees, and axes; these remained in the sky
and did not fall down, like the many-coloured rays of the evening clouds.

40. Another hurled upon him a mass of blazing straw as big as a mountain-peak, which, as soon
as it was thrown, while it hung poised in the sky, was shattered into a hundred fragments
by the sage’s power.

