98. ‘This is not the way to passionlessness, nor to perfect knowledge, nor to liberation; that
was certainly the true way which I found at the root of the Jambu tree.

99. ‘But that cannot be attained by one who has lost his strength’,--so resuming his care for
his body, he next pondered thus, how best to increase his bodily vigour:

100. ‘Wearied with hunger, thirst, and fatigue, with his mind no longer self-possessed through
fatigue, how should one who is not absolutely calm reach the end which is to be attained
by his mind?

101. ‘True calm is properly obtained by the constant satisfaction of the senses; the mind’s
self-possession is only obtained by the senses being perfectly satisfied.

102. ‘True meditation is produced in him whose mind is self-possessed and at rest,--to him whose
thoughts are engaged in meditation the exercise of perfect contemplation begins at once.

103. ‘By contemplation are obtained those conditions through which is eventually gained that
supreme calm, undecaying, immortal state, which is so hard to be reached.’

104. Having thus resolved, ‘this means is based upon eating food,’ the wise seer of unbounded
wisdom, having made up his mind to accept the continuance of life,

105. And having bathed, thin as he was, slowly came up the bank of the Nairaÿjanâ, supported
as by a hand by the trees on the shore, which bent down the ends of their branches in adoration.

106. Now at that time Nandabalâ, the daughter of the leader of the herdsmen, impelled by the
gods, with a sudden joy risen in her heart, had just come near,

107. Her arm gay with a white shell, and wearing a dark blue woollen cloth, like the river Yamunâ,
with its dark blue water and its wreath of foam.

108. She, having her joy increased by her faith, with her lotus-like eyes opened wide, bowed
down before him and persuaded him to take some milk.

109. By partaking that food having made her obtain the full reward of her birth, he himself
became capable of gaining the highest knowledge, all his six senses being now satisfied,

110. The seer, having his body now fully robust, together with his glorious fame, one beauty
and one majesty being equally spread in both, shone like the ocean and the moon.

111. Thinking that he had returned to the world the five mendicants left him, as the five elements
leave the wise soul when it is liberated.

112. Accompanied only by his own resolve, having fixed his mind on the attainment of perfect
knowledge, he went to the root of an Asvattha tree, where the surface of the ground was covered
with young grass.

113. Then Kâla, the best of serpents, whose majesty was like the lord of elephants, having been
awakened by the unparalleled sound of his feet, uttered this praise of the great sage,
being sure that he was on the point of attaining perfect knowledge:

114. ‘Inasmuch as the earth, pressed down by thy feet, O sage, resounds repeatedly, and inasmuch
as thy splendour shines forth like the sun, thou shalt assuredly to-day enjoy the desired
fruit.

115. ‘Inasmuch as lines of birds fluttering in the sky offer thee reverential salutation, O
lotus-eyed one, and inasmuch as gentle breezes blow in the sky, thou shalt certainly to-day
become the Buddha.’

116. Being thus praised by the best of serpents, and having taken some pure grass from a grasscutter,
he, having made his resolution, sat down to obtain perfect knowledge at the foot
of the great holy tree.

117. Then he sat down on his hams in a posture, immovably firm and with his limbs gathered into
a mass like a sleeping serpent’s hood, exclaiming, ‘I will not rise from this position
on the earth until I have obtained my utmost aim.’

