1. Then the moon of the Ikshvâku race turned towards the hermitage of the sage Arâḍa of tranquil
life,--as it were, doing honour to it by his beauty.

2. He drew near, on being addressed in a loud voice ‘Welcome’ by the kinsman of Kâlâma, as he
saw him from afar.

3. They, having mutually asked after each other’s health as was fitting, sat down in a clean
place on two pure wooden seats.

4. The best of sages, having seen the prince seated, and as it were drinking in the sight of
him with eyes opened wide in reverence, thus addressed him:

5. ‘I know, gentle youth, how thou hast come forth from thy home, having severed the bond of
affection, as a wild elephant its cord.

6. ‘In every way thy mind is stedfast and wise, who hast come here after abandoning royal luxury
like a creeper-plant with poisonous fruit.

7. ‘It is no marvel that kings have retired to the forest who have grown old in years, having
given up their glory to their children, like a garland left behind after being used.

8. ‘But this is to me indeed a marvel that thou art come hither in life’s fresh prime, set in
the open field of the world’s enjoyments, ere thou hast as yet tasted of their happiness.

9. ‘Verily thou art a worthy vessel to receive this highest religion; having mastered it with
full knowledge, cross at once over the sea of misery.

10. ‘Though the doctrine is generally efficient only after a time, when the student has been
thoroughly tested, thou art easy for me to examine from thy depth of character and determination.’

11. The prince, having heard these words of Arâḍa, was filled with great pleasure and thus made
reply:

12. ‘This extreme kindliness which thou showest to me, calmly passionless as thou art, makes
me, imperfect as I am, seem even already to have attained perfection.

13. ‘I feel at the sight of thee like one longing to see who finds a light,--like one wishing
to journey, a guide,--or like one wishing to cross, a boat.

14. ‘Wilt thou therefore deign to tell me that secret, if thou thinkest it should be told, whereby
thy servant may be delivered from old age, death, and disease.’

15. Arâḍa, thus impelled by the noble nature of the prince, declared in a concise form the tenets
of his doctrine:

16. ‘O best of hearers, hear this our firmly-settled theory, how our mortal existence arises
and how it revolves.

17. ‘"The evolvent" and "the evolute," birth, old age, and death,--know that this has been called
the reality by us; do thou receive our words, O thou who art stedfast in thy nature.

18. ‘But know, O thou who art deep in the search into the nature of things, that the five elements,
egoism, intellect, and "the unmanifested" are the "evolvents;"

19. ‘But know that the "evolutes" consist of intellect, external objects, the senses, and the
hands, feet, voice, anus, and generative organ, and also the mind.

20. ‘There is also a something which bears the name kshetrajÿa, from its knowledge of this "field"
(kshetra or the body); and those who investigate the soul call the soul kshetrajÿa.

