79. ‘Or if the soul is declared to be unknowing, then of what use to you is this imagined soul?
Even without such a soul, the existence of the absence of knowledge is notorious as, for
instance, in a log of wood or a wall.

80. ‘And since each successive abandonment is held to be still accompanied by qualities, I maintain
that the absolute attainment of our end can only be found in the abandonment of everything.’

81. Thus did he remain unsatisfied after he had heard the doctrine of Arâḍa; then having decided
it to be incomplete, he turned away.

82. Seeking to know the true distinction, he went to the hermitage of Udraka, but he gained
no clear understanding from his treatment of the soul.

83. For the sage Udraka, having learned the inherent imperfections of the name and the thing
named, took refuge in a theory beyond Nihilism, which maintained a name and a non-name.

84. And since even a name and a non-name were substrata, however subtil, he went even further
still and found his restlessness set at rest in the idea that there is no named and no un-named;

85. And because the intellect rested there, not proceeding any further,--it became very subtil,
and there was no such thing as un-named nor as named.

86. But because, even when it has reached this goal it yet returns again to the world, therefore
the Bodhisattva, seeking something beyond, left Udraka.

87. Having quitted his hermitage, fully resolved in his purpose, and seeking final bliss, he
next visited the hermitage, called a city, of the royal sage Gaya.

88. Then on the pure bank of the Nairaÿjanâ the saint whose every effort was pure fixed his
dwelling, bent as he was on a lonely habitation.

91. Then he saw five mendicants who had come there before him; they had taken vows on themselves
and practised austerities, vaunting themselves of control of the five senses.1

89. Five mendicants, desiring liberation, came up to him when they beheld him there, just as
the objects of the senses come up to a percipient who has gained wealth and health by his
previous merit.

90. Being honoured by these disciples who were dwelling in that family, as they bowed reverently
with their bodies bent low in humility, as the mind is honoured by the restless senses,

91. And thinking, ‘this may be the means of abolishing birth and death,’ he at once commenced
a series of difficult austerities by fasting.

92. For six years, vainly trying to attain merit, he practised self-mortification, performing
many rules of abstinence, hard for a man to carry out.

93. At the hours for eating, he, longing to cross the world whose farther shore is so difficult
to reach, broke his vow with single jujube fruits, sesame seeds, and rice.

94. But the emaciation which was produced in his body by that asceticism, became positive fatness
through the splendour which invested him.

95. Though thin, yet with his glory and his beauty unimpaired, he caused gladness to other eyes,
as the autumnal moon in the beginning of her bright fortnight gladdens the lotuses.

96. Having only skin and bone remaining, with his fat, flesh and blood entirely wasted, yet,
though diminished, he still shone with undiminished grandeur like the ocean.

97. Then the seer, having his body evidently emaciated to no purpose in a cruel self-mortification;--dreading
continued existence, thus reflected in his longing to become a Buddha:

