41. ‘The soul, having once learned to distinguish these four properly, having abandoned all
(ideas of) straightness or quickness, attains to the immortal sphere.

42. ‘For this reason the Brâhmans in the world, discoursing on the supreme Brahman, practise
here a rigorous course of sacred study and let other Brâhmans live with them to follow it
also.’

43. The prince, having heard this discourse from the seer, asked concerning the means and the
final state.

44. ‘Wilt thou please to explain to me how, how far, and where this life of sacred study is
to be led, and the limit of this course of life?’

45. Then Arâḍa, according to his doctrine, declared to him in another way that course of life
clearly and succinctly.

46. ‘The devotee, in the beginning, having left his house, and assumed the signs of the mendicant,
goes on, following a rule of conduct which extends to the whole life.

47. ‘Cultivating absolute content with any alms from any person, he carries out his lonely life,
indifferent to all feelings, meditating on the holy books, and satisfied in himself.

48. ‘Then having seen how fear arises from passion and the highest happiness from the absence
of passion, he strives, by restraining all the senses, to attain to tranquillity of mind.

49. ‘Then he reaches the first stage of contemplation, which is separated from desires, evil
intentions and the like, and arises from discrimination and which involves reasoning.

50. ‘And having obtained this ecstatic contemplation, and reasoning on various objects, the
childish mind is carried away by the possession of the new unknown ecstasy.

51. ‘With a tranquillity of this kind, which disdains desire or dislike, he reaches the world
of Brahman, deceived by the delight.

52. ‘But the wise man, knowing that these reasonings bewilder the mind, reaches a (second) stage
of contemplation separate from this, which has its own pleasure and ecstasy.

53. ‘And he who, carried away by this pleasure, sees no further distinction, obtains a dwelling
full of light, even amongst the âbhâsura deities.

54. ‘But he who separates his mind from this pleasure and ecstasy, reaches the third stage of
contemplation ecstatic but without pleasure.

55. ‘Upon this stage some teachers make their stand, thinking that it is indeed liberation,
since pleasure and pain have been left behind and there is no exercise of the intellect.

56. ‘But he who, immersed in this ecstasy, strives not for a further distinction, obtains an
ecstasy in common with the Subhakritsna deities.

57. ‘But he who, having attained such a bliss desires it not but despises it, obtains the fourth
stage of contemplation which is separate from all pleasure or pain.

58. ‘The fruit of this contemplation which is on an equality with the Vrihatphala deities, those
who investigate the great wisdom call the Vrihatphala.

59. ‘But rising beyond this contemplation, having seen the imperfections of all embodied souls,
the wise man climbs to a yet higher wisdom in order to abolish all body.

60. ‘Then, having abandoned this contemplation, being resolved to find a further distinction,
he becomes as disgusted with form itself as he who knows the real is with pleasures.

