21. ‘Kapila with his disciple became the illuminated,--such is the tradition; and he, as the
illuminated, with his son is now called here Prajâpati.

22. ‘That which is born and grows old and is bound and dies,--is to be known as "the manifested,"
and "the unmanifested" is to be distinguished by its contrariety.

23. ‘Ignorance, the merit or demerit of former actions, and desire are to be known as the causes
of mundane existence; he who abides in the midst of this triad does not attain to the
truth of things, Þ

24. ‘From mistake, egoism, confusion, fluctuation, indiscrimination, false means, inordinate
attachment, and gravitation.

25. ‘Now "mistake" acts in a contrary manner, it does wrongly what it should do, and what it
should think it thinks wrongly.

26. ‘"I say," "I know," "I go," "I am firmly fixed," it is thus that "egoism" shows itself here,
O thou who art free from all egoism.

27. ‘That state of mind is called "confusion," O thou who art all unconfused, which views under
one nature, massed like a lump of clay, objects that thus become confused in their nature.

28. ‘That state of mind which says that this mind, intellect, and these actions are the same
as "I," and that which says that all this aggregate is the same as "I,"--is called "fluctuation."

29. ‘That state of mind is called "indiscrimination," O thou who art discriminating, which thinks
there is no difference between the illuminated and the unwise, and between the different
evolvents.

30. ‘Uttering "namas" and "vashañ," sprinkling water upon sacrifices, &c. with or without the
recital of Vedic hymns, and such like rites,--these are declared by the wise to be "false
means," O thou who art well skilled in true means.

31. ‘That is called "inordinate attachment," by which the fool is entangled in external objects
through his mind, speech, actions, and thoughts, O thou who hast shaken thyself free from
all attachments.

32. ‘The misery which a man imagines by the ideas "This is mine," "I am connected with this,"
is to be recognised as "gravitation,"--by this a man is borne downwards into new births.

33. ‘Thus Ignorance, O ye wise, being fivefold in its character, energises towards torpor, delusion,
the great delusion, and the two kinds of darkness.

34. ‘Know, that among these indolence is "torpor," death and birth are "delusion," and be it
clearly understood, O undeluded one, that desire is the "great delusion."

35. ‘Since by it even the higher beings are deluded, therefore, O hero, is this called the "great
delusion."

36. ‘They define anger, O thou angerless one, as "darkness;" and despondency, O undesponding,
they pronounce to be the "blind darkness."

37. ‘The child, entangled in this fivefold ignorance, is effused in his different births in
a world abounding with misery.

38. ‘He wanders about in the world of embodied existence, thinking that I am the seer, and the
hearer, and the thinker,--the effect and the cause.

39. ‘Through these causes, O wise prince, the stream of "torpor" is set in motion; be pleased
to consider that in the absence of the cause there is the absence of the effect.

40. ‘Let the wise man who has right views know these four things, O thou who desirest liberation,--the
illuminated and the unilluminated, the manifested and the unmanifested.

