41. One, rising up like the sun in full splendour, rained down from the sky a great shower of
live embers, as at the end of an aeon blazing Meru showers down the pulverised scoriae of
the golden valleys.

42. But that shower of embers full of sparks, when scattered at the foot of the Bodhi tree,
became a shower of red lotus-petals through the operation of the great saint’s boundless charity.

43. But with all these various scorching assaults on his body and his mind, and all these missiles
showered down upon him, the Sâkya saint did not in the least degree move from his posture,
clasping firmly his resolution as a kinsman.

44. Then others spat out serpents from their mouths as from old decayed trunks of trees; but,
as if held fast by a charm, near him they neither breathed nor discharged venom nor moved.

45. Others, having become great clouds, emitting lightning and uttering the fierce roar of thunderbolts,
poured a shower of stones upon that tree,--but it turned to a pleasant shower
of flowers.

46. Another set an arrow in his bow,--there it gleamed but it did not issue forth, like the
anger which falls slack in the soul of an ill-tempered impotent man.

47. But five arrows shot by another stood motionless and fell not, through the saint’s ruling
guidance,--like the five senses of him who is well experienced in the course of worldly
objects and is afraid of embodied existence.

48. Another, full of anger, rushed towards the great saint, having seized a club with a desire
to smite him; but he fell powerless without finding an opportunity, like mankind in the
presence of faults which cause failure.

49. But a woman named Meghakâlî, bearing a skull in her hand, in order to infatuate the mind
of the sage, flitted about unsettled and stayed not in one spot, like the mind of the fickle
student over the sacred texts.

50. Another, fixing a kindling eye, wished to burn him with the fire of his glance like a poisonous
serpent; but he saw the sage and lo! he was not there, like the votary of pleasure
when true happiness is pointed out to him.

51. Another, lifting up a heavy rock, wearied himself to no purpose, having his efforts baffled,
like one who wishes to obtain by bodily fatigue that condition of supreme happiness which
is only to be reached by meditation and knowledge.

52. Others, wearing the forms of hyenas and lions, uttered loudly fierce howls, which caused
all beings round to quail with terror, as thinking that the heavens were smitten with a thunderbolt
and were bursting.

53. Deer and elephants uttering cries of pain ran about or lay down,--in that night as if it
were day screaming birds flew around disturbed in all directions.

54. But amidst all these various sounds which they made, although all living creatures were
shaken, the saint trembled not nor quailed, like Garuḍa at the noise of crows.

55. The less the saint feared the frightful hosts of that multitude, the more did Mâra, the
enemy of the righteous, continue his attacks in grief and anger.

56. Then some being of invisible shape, but of pre-eminent glory, standing in the heavens,--beholding
Mâra thus malevolent against the seer,--addressed him in a loud voice, unruffled
by enmity:

57. ‘Take not on thyself, O Mâra, this vain fatigue,--throw aside thy malevolence and retire
to peace; this sage cannot be shaken by thee any more than the mighty mountain Meru by the
wind.

58. ‘Even fire might lose its hot nature, water its fluidity, earth its steadiness, but never
will he abandon his resolution, who has acquired his merit by a long course of actions through
unnumbered aeons.

59. ‘Such is that purpose of his, that heroic effort, that glorious strength, that compassion
for all beings,--until he attains the highest wisdom, he will never rise from his seat,
just as the sun does not rise, without dispelling the darkness.

60. ‘One who rubs the two pieces of wood obtains the fire, one who digs the earth finds at last
the water,--and to him in his perseverance there is nothing unattainable,--all things
to him are reasonable and possible.

