61. ‘Pitying the world lying distressed amidst diseases and passions, he, the great physician,
ought not to be hindered, who undergoes all his labours for the sake of the remedy knowledge.

62. ‘He who toilsomely pursues the one good path, when all the world is carried away in devious
tracks,--he the guide should not be disturbed, like a right informant when the caravan
has lost its way.

63. ‘He who is made a lamp of knowledge when all beings are lost in the great darkness,--it
is not for a right-minded soul to try to quench him,--like a lamp kindled in the gloom of
night.

64. ‘He who, when he beholds the world drowned in the great flood of existence and unable to
reach the further shore, strives to bring them safely across,--would any right-minded soul
offer him wrong?

65. ‘The tree of knowledge, whose roots go deep in firmness, and whose fibres are patience,--whose
flowers are moral actions and whose branches are memory and thought,--and which gives
out the law as its fruit,--surely when it is growing it should not be cut down.

66. ‘Him whose one desire is to deliver mankind bound in soul by the fast snares of illusion,--thy
wish to overthrow him is not worthy, wearied as he is for the sake of unloosing the
bonds of the world.

67. ‘To-day is the appointed period of all those actions which have been performed by him for
the sake of knowledge,--he is now seated on this seat just as all the previous saints have
sat.

68. ‘This is the navel of the earth’s surface, endued with all the highest glory; there is no
other spot of the earth than this,--the home of contemplation, the realm of well-being.

69. ‘Give not way, then, to grief but put on calm; let not thy greatness, O Mâra, be mixed with
pride; it is not well to be confident,--fortune is unstable,--why dost thou accept a position
on a tottering base?’

70. Having listened to his words, and having seen the unshaken firmness of the great saint,
Mâra departed dispirited and broken in purpose with those very arrows by which, O world, thou
art smitten in thy heart.

71. With their triumph at an end, their labour all fruitless, and all their stones, straw, and
trees thrown away, that host of his fled in all directions, like some hostile army when
its camp has been destroyed by the enemy.

72. When the flower-armed god thus fled away vanquished with his hostile forces and the passionless
sage remained victorious, having conquered all the power of darkness, the heavens
shone out with the moon like a maiden with a smile, and a sweet-smelling shower of flowers
fell down wet with dew.

73. When the wicked one thus fled vanquished, the different regions of the sky grew clear, the
moon shone forth, showers of flowers fell down from the sky upon the earth, and the night
gleamed out like a spotless maiden.

Book XIV [Enlightenment]

