1. Then, having conquered the hosts of Mâra by his firmness and calmness, he the great master
of meditation set himself to meditate, longing to know the supreme end.

2. And having attained the highest mastery in all kinds of meditation, he remembered in the
first watch the continuous series of all his former births.

3. ‘In such a place I was so and so by name, and from thence I passed and came hither,’ thus
he remembered his thousands of births, experiencing each as it were over again.

4. And having remembered each birth and each death in all those various transmigrations, the
compassionate one then felt compassion for all living beings.

5. Having wilfully rejected the good guides in this life and done all kinds of actions in various
lives, this world of living beings rolls on helplessly, like a wheel.

6. As he thus remembered, to him in his strong self-control came the conviction, ‘All existence
is insubstantial, like the fruit of a plantain.’

7. When the second watch came, he, possessed of unequalled energy, received a pre-eminent divine
sight, like the highest of all sight-gifted beings.

8. Then by that divine perfectly pure sight he beheld the whole world as in a spotless mirror.

9. As he saw the various transmigrations and rebirths of the various beings with their several
lower or higher merits from their actions, compassion grew up more within him.

10. ‘These living beings, under the influence of evil actions, pass into wretched worlds,--these
others, under the influence of good actions, go forward in heaven.

11. ‘The one, being born in a dreadful hell full of terrors, are miserably tortured, alas! by
many kinds of suffering;

12. ‘Some are made to drink molten iron of the colour of fire, others are lifted aloft screaming
on a red-hot iron pillar;

13. ‘Others are baked like flour, thrown with their heads downwards into iron jars; others are
miserably burned in heaps of heated charcoal;

14. ‘Some are devoured by fierce dreadful dogs with iron teeth, others by gloating crows with
iron beaks and all made as it were of iron;

15. ‘Some, wearied of being burned, long for cold shade; these enter like bound captives into
a dark blue wood with swords for leaves.

16. ‘Others having many arms are split like timber with axes, but even in that agony they do
not die, being supported in their vital powers by their previous actions.

17. ‘Whatever deed was done only to hinder pain with the hope that it might bring pleasure,
its result is now experienced by these helpless victims as simple pain.

18. These who did something evil for the sake of pleasure and are now grievously pained,--does
that old taste produce even an atom of pleasure to them now?

19. ‘The wicked deed which was done by the wicked-hearted in glee,--its consequences are reaped
by them in the fulness of time with cries.

20. ‘If only evil doers could see the fruits of their actions, they would vomit hot blood as
if they were smitten in a vital part.

